"Dear Uncle Bill:" (And why he should have called me "Uncle Bill,"
Heaven only knows. I was not his uncle and almost never had I been
addressed as "Bill." But he chose the name, without explanation, from
the first.) "Dear Uncle Bill: Where am I going to in vacation? The
fellows ask. Their fathers come to Commencement and take them home. I'm
the only one out, because my father's dead. And I haven't anybody to
belong to. It would be great if you'd come. Yours Sincerely--John."

      [A] Copyright, 1919, by the American National Red Cross.

I threw the letter in the scrap-basket and an hour later fished it out.
I read it over. I--go to a school commencement! Not if I knew it! The
cheek of the whippersnapper! I had not even seen him; he might be any
sort of wild Indian; he might expect me to "take him home" afterwards.
Rather _not_! I should give him to understand that I would pay his
bills and--well, yes--I would send him to a proper place in vacations;
but be bothered by him personally I would not. Fishing trips to Canada
interrupted by a child! Unthinkable. I would write to that effect.

I sat down to my orderly desk and drew out paper. I began: "Dear John."
Then I stopped. An unwelcome vision arose of a small boy who was "the
only one out." "My father's dead." Thirty years rolled back, and I saw
the charming boy, a cousin, who had come to be this lad's father. I
turned my head at that thought, as long ago I had turned it every
morning when I waked to look at him, the beautiful youngster of my
adoration, sleeping across the room which we shared together. For a
dozen years we shared that room and other things--ponies, trips abroad,
many luxuries. For the father and mother who worshipped and pampered
John, and who were casually kind to me, an uninteresting orphan--these
were rich, then, and free-handed. Too free-handed, it was seen later,
for when the two were killed at one moment in an accident, only debts
were left for John. I was suddenly important, I, the gray satellite of
the rainbow prince, for I had a moderate fortune. The two of us were
just graduated from Yale; John with honors and prizes and hosts of
friends, I with some prizes and honors. Yet I had not been "tapped" for
"Bones" or "Scroll and Key"[49-1] and I was a solitary pilgrim ever,
with no intimates. We stood so together, facing out towards life.

I split my unimpressive patrimony in two and John took his part and
wandered south on a mining adventure. For that, he was always keen
about the south and his plan from seventeen on was to live in Italy.
But it was I, after all, who went to Italy year after year, while John
led Lord knows what thriftless life in Florida. From the last morning
when he had wheeled, in our old big room, and dashed across it and
thrown his arms around me in his own impulsive, irresistible way--since
that morning I had never seen him. Letters, plenty. More money was
needed always. John always thought that the world owed him a living.

Then he did the thing which was incredible and I pulled him out and
hushed up the story and repaid the money, but it made me ill, and I
suppose I was a bit savage, for he barely answered my letters after,
and shortly stopped writing altogether. John could not endure
unpleasantness. I lost sight of him till years later when he--and
I--were near forty and I had a note signed Margaret Donaldson, John's
wife. John was dead. He had been on a shooting trip and a gun had gone
off. Though it was not in words, yet through them I got a vague
suggestion of suicide. Heavy-hearted, I wondered. The life so suddenly
ended had once been dear to me.

"They did not bring John home," the note said. "He was so badly
mutilated that they buried him near where he died. I believe he would
have wanted you to know, and for that reason I am writing. I am an
entirely capable bread-winner, so that John's boy and I will have no
troubles as to money."

There was a child two years old. I liked the chill and the independence
of the proud little note.

The next chapter opened ten years later with a letter saying that
Margaret Donaldson's boy was left with her poor and elderly parents and
that they did not want him. Would I, his mother being dead, take care
of him? He was twelve, healthy and intelligent--which led directly to
the evening when I sat, very cross, at my desk and fished young John's
note out of the scrap-basket. I had got as far in answer as "Dear
John"--when these visions of the past interrupted. I am not soft-hearted.
I am crabbed and prejudiced and critical, and I dislike irregularity.
Above all I am thoroughly selfish. But the sum of that is short of
being brutal. Only sheer brutality could repel the lad's note and
request. My answer went as follows:

    "Dear John: I will come to your commencement and bring you back
    with me for a short time. I may take you on a fishing trip to
    Canada. Sincerely, Uncle Bill."

The youngster as he came into the school drawing-room was a thing to
remember. He was a tall boy, and he looked like his father. Very olive
he was--and is--and his blue eyes shone out of the dark face from under
the same thickset and long lashes. His father's charm and beauty halted
me, but I judged, before I let myself go, that he had also his mother's
stability. I have seen no reason since to doubt my judgment. I never
had so fine a fishing trip to Canada as that summer, in spite of the
fact that John broke four good rods. He has been my most successful
investment; and when the war broke out and he rushed to me clamoring to
go, I felt indeed that I was giving humanity my best and my own. Then
one day he came, in his uniform of an ambulance driver, to tell me
good-bye.

That was in 1914, and the boy, just about to enter Yale, was eighteen.
He went through bad fighting, and in March, 1917, he was given a Croix
de Guerre.[52-1] Then America came in and he transferred to his own
flag and continued ambulance work under our Red Cross. He drove one
of the twenty ambulances hurried into Italy after the Caporetto
disaster[52-2] in October, the first grip of the hand of America to
that brave hand of Italy.

I did not know for a time that my lad was in the ambulance section
rushed to Italy, but I had a particular interest from the first in this
drive for I had spent weeks, twice, up in Lombardy and Venetia.[52-3]
That was how I followed the Italian disaster--as a terrible blow to a
number of old friends. Then after the Caporetto crisis came the stand
behind the Tagliamento;[52-4] the retreat still farther and the more
hopeful stand behind the Piave.[52-5] And with that I knew that the
First Ambulance Section was racing to the Italian front and that my
boy was driving one of the cars.

And behold it was now the year 1919 and the war was over and the
cablegram from Bordeaux, which read: "Sailing 13th Santa Angela 12 day
boat New York," was a week old.

Of course I met him. I left a director's meeting and vital engagements,
with indecent firmness, to meet that ship. At crack of dawn on a raw
morning in March I arose and drove miles to a freezing pier to meet it.
And presently, as I stood muffled in a fur coat, an elderly, grizzled,
small man, grim and unexhilarating--presently the soul of this
monotonous person broke into song. For out of the early morning, out
from behind a big anchored vessel near the pier, poked the nose of a
troop ship and lumbered forward, and her decks were brown with three
thousand soldiers--Americans of our victorious army coming home from
overseas.

It was a sight which none of us will ever see again. Out in the harbor
tugs were yelping, whistles blowing; the little fleet which had gone
down the bay to meet the incoming troops was screaming itself mad in a
last chorus of joyful welcome. And the good ship _Santa Angela_,
blessed old tub, rolled nearer till the lads on her, shouting, waving,
laughing, crying lads could be seen separately, and she had rounded the
corner into the slip and was mere yards from the dock.

And then the boy came down the gangplank and I greeted him as is my
ungracious way, as if he had been off on a sailing trip. But he knew,
and he held to me, the tall fellow, with his arm around my shoulder
unashamed, and from that moment to this in the den he had hardly let me
out of his sight.

After dinner that night I settled back in deep satisfaction and lighted
a fresh cigar. And the boy, standing before the blazing logs, which
kept up a pleasant undertone to the music of his young voice, began.

"You know, Uncle Bill, we were blamed proud to be Red Cross when we
knew what was doing about Italy. It was plumb great. You know it all
of course. But I saw it. No worse fight ever--in all history. Towns
turned into a rolling river of refugees. Hungry, filthy, rain-soaked,
half-clad--old, babies, sick--a multitude pitiful beyond words--stumbling,
racing down those mountain trails, anyhow--to get anywhere--away."

He dropped into a chair and went on.

"We didn't get there for the first, but it was plenty bad enough," and
his eyes were seeing wordless sights. "The United States had declared
war on Austria December 7th, and four days later Section One was
rolling across the battlefield of Solferino.

"I was proud to be in that bunch. Talk about the flower of a country,
Uncle Bill,--we grew 'em. Six wore the Croix de Guerre--well, of course
that's often just luck." He reddened as he remembered who was one of
that six. "All of them had gone through battles a-plenty. Whole
shooting-match keen for service--no slackers and no greenhorns in that
crowd.

"We started on the twelve hundred mile trip to Milan from Paris
November 18th, and at Ventimiglia, just over the border, Italy welcomed
us. Lord, Uncle Bill," the boy laughed out, and rubbed his eyes where
tears stood. "They wouldn't look at our passports--no, sir! They opened
the gate to Italy and we rolled in like visiting princes. They showered
presents on us, those poor villagers--food, flowers--all they had.
Often didn't keep any for themselves.

"We got there December 8th. Tuned up the cars and were off again in
two or three days, to the job. They gave us a great send-off. Real
party. Two parties. First a sort of reception in a big gray courtyard
of an old palace, all dolled up with American and Italian flags. Big
bugs and speeches--and they presented us to Italy. A bugle blew and
a hundred of us in khaki--we'd been reinforced--stood at salute and
an Italian general swept into the gates with his train of plumed
Bersagliari[55-1]--sent to take us over. Then we twenty drove our
busses out with our own flags flying and pulled up again for Party
Number Two in front of the Cathedral. Finally the Mayor bid us his
prettiest good-bye, and off we drove again through the cheering crowds
and the waving flags--this time out of the city gate--to the Piave
front."

The boy rose from his chair, put on a fresh log, then turned and stood
facing me, towering over me in his young magnificence.

It flashed to me that I'd never seen him look so like his father, yet
so different. All John Donaldson's physical beauty, all his charm were
repeated in his son, but underlaid with a manliness, a force which poor
John never had.

"We were pitched into the offensive in the hottest of it," spoke the
boy. "It was thick. We were hampered by lack of workers. We wanted
Americans. Morgan had a thought.

"'Italy's full of Americans,' he suggested. 'Living here. Over military
age, but fit for a lot of our use. I miss my guess if bunches of 'em
wouldn't jump at a chance to get busy under their own flag.'

"We sent out a call and they came. Down from hill-towns, out of cities,
from villages we'd never heard of--it was amazing how they came. We
didn't dream there was such a number. Every one middle-aged, American
all, and gentlemen all. One morning, after brisk work the night before,
I'd just turned out and was standing by my bus--I slept on a stretcher
inside--I saw a big, athletic, grizzled chap, maybe fifty-five or over,
shabby as to clothes, yet with an air like a duke, sauntering up. How
he got in there I never thought to ask. He held out his hand as if we
were old friends. 'Good morning,' he said. 'I hope I didn't wake you
up. How do you like Italy?' There was something attractive about him,
something suggestive of a gracious host whose flower garden was
Italy--which he trusted was to my taste. I told him I worshipped Italy.

"Just then a shell--they were coming over off and on--struck two
hundred yards down the road and we both turned to look. In thirty
seconds, maybe, another--and another--placed middling close, half a
minute apart maybe, till eight had plowed along that bit. When they
stopped, he looked at me. 'That's the first time I ever saw shells
light nearby,' he spoke. 'Eight, I made it. But two were duds, weren't
they?'

"It didn't seem to occur to him that they might have hit him. About
then he saw me wondering, I suppose, what a civilian was doing making
conversation inside the lines before breakfast, and he explained.

"'You need men for the Red Cross, I believe,' he explained. 'I came to
offer my services.' He spoke English perfectly, yet with a foreign
twist, and he was so very dark that I wondered about his nationality.

"'Are you Italian?' I asked, and at that he started and straightened
his big shabby shoulders as if I'd hit him, and flushed through his
brown skin.

"'American, sir,' he said proudly.

"And, Uncle Bill, something in the way he said it almost brought tears
to my eyes. It was as if his right to being American was the last and
most precious thing he owned, and as if I'd tried to take it from him.

"So I threw back 'That's great,' as heartily as I knew how, and shook
hands with him over it.

"There was something about him which I couldn't place. He looked--natural.
Especially his eyes.

"Well, I said we'd be delighted to use him, and told him where to
report and then, though it wasn't my business, I asked his name. And
what do you think he told me?"

I shook my head.

"He gave his name as John Donaldson," stated the boy.

"What!" I asked bewildered. "This man in Italy was called----"

"By my name," the boy said slowly. "John Donaldson."

I reasoned a bit. "John Donaldson" is a name not impossible to be
duplicated. "It was devilish odd," I said, "to run into your own handle
like that, wasn't it?"

The boy went on. "At that second Ted Frith ran along shouting, '7:30.
Better hurry. Coffee's waiting.' So I threw the strange man a good-bye
and bolted.

"That day we were going some. They were heaving eggs from the other
side of the Piave and we were bringing back wounded to the dressing
stations as fast as we could make it over that wrecked land; going back
faster for more. When I stopped for chow at midday, I found Ted Frith
near me, eating also.

"'Remember the old boy you were talking to this morning?' asked Ted
between two mouthfuls of dum-dums--that's beans, Uncle Bill. I 'lowed I
remembered the old boy; in fact he'd stuck in my mind all day.

"'Well,' Ted went on, 'he's a ring-tailed snorter. He's got an American
uniform, tin derby and all, and he's up in the front trenches in the
cold and mud with his chocolates and stuff, talking the lingo to the
wops and putting heart into them something surprising. They're cheering
up wherever he goes. Good work.'

"That afternoon I ran into the man under hot fire hurrying down the
communication trench for more stuff. He looked as pleased as a boy with
a new pony. 'Hello,' I yelled across the noise. 'How do you like our
Italy? They tell me you're helping a lot.'

"He stopped and stared with those queerly homelike, big eyes. 'Do
they?' he smiled. 'It's the best time I've had for years, sir.'

"'Needn't _sir_ me,' I explained. 'I'm not an officer.'

"'Ah, but you are--my superior officer,' he argued in a courteous,
lovely way. 'I'm a recruit--raw recruit. Certainly I must say _sir_, to
you.'

"'Duck there,' I shouted. 'You're on a rise--you'll be hit.'

"He glanced around. 'If you knew what a treat I'd consider it to be
done for wearing this.' He looked down and slapped his big knee in its
khaki. 'But if I'm helping, it's the game to keep whole. You see, sir,'
and he laughed out loud--'this is my good day. I'm American to-day,
sir!'

"And as I let in the clutch and turned the wheel, I sniffled. The man's
delight at being allowed to do a turn of any sort under the flag got
me.

"The hideous day wore on; one of the worst I went through. We were
rushing 'em steadily--four badly wounded in the back you know, and one
who could sit up in the front seat with the driver, every trip. About
3:30 as I was going up to the front lines, I struck Ted Firth again
coming down.

"'That you, Johnny?' he shouted as we jammed together, and then: 'Your
friend's got his,' he said. We were caught in a crowd and had to wait,
so we could talk.

"'Oh no!' I groaned. 'Gone west?'

"He shook his head. 'I think not yet. But I'm afraid he's finished. Had
to leave him. Didn't see him till I was loaded up. He's been
stretcher-bearer the last three hours.'

"'The devil he has. Why?'

"'A sudden attack--bearer was killed. He jumped in and grabbed the
stretcher. Powerful old boy. Back and forth from the hurricane to the
little dressing station, and at last he got it. Thick to-day, isn't
it?'

"'Stretcher-bearer!' I repeated. 'Nerve for a new bird.'

"'Nerve!' echoed Teddy. 'He's been eating it up. The hotter it got, the
better it suited. He's one of the heroes fast enough. If he lives, he's
due a cross for his last stunt--out under fire twice in five minutes to
bring in wounded. But he won't live. There--it's clearing. You run
along and find the old boy, Johnny.'

"I found him. He was hurt too badly to talk about. As gently as we knew
how, Joe Barron and I lifted him into the car and he recognized me.

"'Why, good evening, sir,' he greeted me, smiling at the disputed
title, charming and casual as ever. He identified me--'The boy who
adored Italy.' Then: 'Such luck!' he gasped. 'Killed--in our
uniform--serving!' And as he felt my hand on his forehead: 'For God's
sake don't be sorry, lad,' he begged. 'A great finish for me. I never
hoped for luck like this.'

"There's a small village," the boy went on--"I never knew its name;
it's back of the Piave; only a pile of broken stuff now anyhow. But the
church was standing that night, a lovely old church with a tower
pierced with windows. We stuck in a traffic jam in front of that
church. The roads were one solid column going forward into the mess.
Mile after mile of it in one stream--and every parallel road must have
been the same.

"It got dark early and the ration truck was late coming up, being
caught in the jam. It was night by the time the eats were ready and I
left my bus in front of the church I spoke of. I'd wished myself on the
officers of a battery having mess in trees back of a ruined house. When
I went back to the bus, it was clean dark. But the sky was alight with
gun flashes from everywhere, a continuous flicker like summer lightning
with glares here and there like a sudden blaze from a factory chimney.
The rumbling gun thunder was without a break, punctuated by heavier
boomings; the near guns seemed an insane 4th of July. I looked in at my
load and I saw that my namesake was worse. We were still trapped in the
jam; no chance of breaking for hours maybe. I saw then that they'd
turned the church into a dressing station. There was straw on the stone
floors and two surgeons and some orderlies. Wounded were being carried
in on stretchers. Joe Barron and I lifted out John Donaldson and took
him in and cared for him as well as possible until we could corral an
overworked doctor. I thought I'd talk to him a bit to distract him, and
he seemed glad to have me."

The lad stopped; his big fingers pulled at the collar of his uniform.

"Little by little," he went on, "John Donaldson of Italy told his
story. He held tight to my hand as he told it." The boy halted again
and bit at his lower lip with strong white teeth. "I like to remember
that," he went on slowly. "He had lived nearly twenty years in Perugia.
He had run away from America. Because--he--took money. Quite a lot of
money. He--was supposed to be dead."

I sat forward, grasping the sides of my chair, pulling the thing out of
the boy with straining gaze.

"Uncle Bill," he spoke, and his dear voice shook, "you know who it was.
I found why his eyes looked familiar. They were exactly like my own.
The man I was helping to die was my father."

I heard my throat make a queer sound, but I said no word. The voice
flowed on, difficultly, determinedly.

"It's a strange thing to remember--a weird and unearthly bit of
living--that war-ruined church, strewn with straw, the wounded wrapped
like mummies in dark blankets, their white bandages making high spots
in the wavering, irregular lights of lanterns and pocket flashes moving
about. I sat on the pavement by his side, hand in hand. A big crucifix
hung above, and the Christ seemed to be looking--at him."

The voice stopped. I heard my own as a sound from beyond me asking a
question. "How did you find out?" I asked.

"Why, you see, Uncle Bill," he answered, as if my voice had helped him
to normality a bit, "I started off by saying I'd write to anybody for
him, and wasn't there somebody at home maybe? And he smiled out of his
torture, and said 'Nobody.'

"Then I said how proud we were of such Americans as he had shown
himself and how much he'd helped. I told him what Teddy Frith said of
how he'd put heart into the men. And about the war cross. At that his
face brightened.

"'Did he really say I'd helped?' He was awfully pleased. Then he
considered a moment and spoke: 'There's one lad I'd like to have
know--if it's possible to find him--and if he ever knows anything about
me--that I died decently.'

"I threw at him--little dreaming the truth, yet eagerly--'I'll find
him. I promise it. What's his name?'

"And he smiled again, an alluring, sidewise smile he had, and said:
'Why, the same name as mine--John Donaldson. He was my baby.'

"Then for the first time the truth came in sight, and my heart stood
still. I couldn't speak. But I thought fast. I feared giving him a
shock, yet I had to know--I had to tell him. I put my free hand over
his that clung to me and I said: 'Do you know, Mr. Donaldson, it's
queer, but that's my name too. I also am John Donaldson.'

"He turned his head with a start and his eyes got wide. 'You are?' he
said, and he peered at me in the half light. 'I believe you look like
me. God!' he said. His face seemed to sharpen and he shot words at me.
'Quick!' he said. 'I mayn't have time. What was your mother's name?'

"I told him.

"He was so still for a breath that I thought I'd killed him. Then his
face lighted--quite angelically, Uncle Bill. And he whispered, two or
three words at a time--you know the words, Uncle Bill--Tennyson:

"'Sunset and evening star' he whispered:

"'Sunset and evening star,

"'And one clear call for me----'

"He patted the breast of his bloody, grimy uniform. 'Following the
flag! Me! My son to hold my hand as I go out! I hadn't dreamed of such
a passing.' Then he looked up at me, awfully interested. 'So you're my
big son,' he said. 'My baby.'

"I knew that he was remembering the little shaver he'd left twenty
years back. So I leaned over and kissed him, and he got his arm around
my neck and held me pretty tight a minute, and nobody cared. All those
dying, suffering, last-ditch men lying around, and the two worn-out
doctors hurrying among 'em--they didn't care. No more did he and I. I'd
found my father; I wasn't caring for anything else."

There was deep silence in the room again and a log of the fire crackled
and fell apart and blazed up impersonally; the pleasant sound jarred
not at all the tense, human atmosphere.

"And he----! Uncle Bill," went on the throbbing voice, "through the
devilish pain he was radiant. He was, thank God! I wanted to hold up a
doctor and get dope to quiet him--and he wouldn't.

"'It might make me unconscious,' he objected. 'Would I lose a minute of
you? Not if I know it! This is the happiest hour I've had for twenty
years.'

"He told me, a bit at a time, about things. First how he'd arranged so
that even my mother thought him dead. Then the bald facts of his
downfall. He hated to tell that.

"'Took money,' he said. 'Very unjustifiable. But I ought to have had
plenty--life's most unreasonable. Then--I couldn't face--discovery--hate,
unpleasantness.' He shuddered. 'Might have been--jailed.' It was
shaking him so I tried to stop him, but he pointed to his coat and
laughed--Uncle Bill, a pitiful laugh. It tore me. 'John Donaldson's
making a good getaway,' he labored out. 'Must tell everything. I'll
finish--clean. To--my son. Honor of--the uniform.' He was getting
exhausted. 'That's all,' he ended, 'Dishonor.'

"And I flung at him: 'No--no. It's covered over--wiped out--with
service and honor. You're dying for the flag, father--father!' I
whispered with my arms around him and crying like a child with a
feeling I'd never known before. 'Father, father!' I whispered, and he
lifted a hand and patted my head.

"'That sounds nice,' he said. Suddenly he looked amused. His nerve all
through was the bulliest thing you ever saw, Uncle Bill. Not a whimper.
'You thought I was Italian,' he brought out. 'Years ago, this morning.
But--I'm not. American, sir--I heard the call--the one clear call.
American.'

"Then he closed his eyes and his breathing was so easy that I thought
he might sleep, and live hours, maybe. I loosened his fingers and
lifted his head on my coat that I'd folded for a pillow, for I thought
I'd go outside and find Joe Barron and get him to take the bus down
when the jam held up so I could start. Before I started, I bent over
again and he opened his eyes, and I said very distinctly: 'I want you
to know that I'll be prouder all my life than words can say that I've
had you for a father,' and he brought out a long, perfectly contented
sigh, and seemed to drop off.

"I began to pick my way through the clutter of men lying, some still as
death, some writhing and gurgling horrid sounds. I had got about eight
feet when across the hideous noises broke a laugh like a pleased kid. I
whirled. He'd lifted his big shoulders up from the straw and was
laughing after me from under those thick black lashes; his eyes were
brilliant. He stretched out his arms to me.

"'American, sir,' he said in a strong voice. And fell back dead."

I heard the clock tick and tick. And tick. Minutes went by. Then the
boy got up in the throbbing silence and walked to the fire and stood,
his back to me, looking down at the embers. His voice came over his
square young shoulders, difficult but determined, as of a man who must
say a thing which has dogged him to be said.

"God arranged it, Uncle Bill. I know that well enough. God forgave him
enough to send him me and a happy day to go out on. So don't you
believe--that things are all right with him now?"

It was hard to speak, but I had to--I had a message. "John," I said,
"we two know the splendor of his going, and that other things count as
nothing beside that redemption. Do you suppose a great God is more
narrow-minded than we?"

And my boy turned, and came and sat on the broad side of the chair, and
put his arm around my shoulder and his young head against mine. His
cheek was hot and wet on my thin hair.

"American, sir," whispered my dear boy, softly.