I

Penrod and Sam made a gloomy discovery one morning in mid-October. All
the week had seen amiable breezes and fair skies until Saturday, when,
about breakfast-time, the dome of heaven filled solidly with gray vapor
and began to drip. The boys' discovery was that there is no justice
about the weather.

They sat in the carriage-house of the Schofields' empty stable; the
doors upon the alley were open, and Sam and Penrod stared torpidly at
the thin but implacable drizzle which was the more irritating because
there was barely enough of it to interfere with a number of things they
had planned to do.

"Yes; this is _nice_!" Sam said, in a tone of plaintive sarcasm. "This
is a _perty_ way to do!" (He was alluding to the personal spitefulness
of the elements.) "I'd like to know what's the sense of it--ole sun
pourin' down every day in the week when nobody needs it, then cloud up
and rain all Saturday! My father said it's goin' to be a three days'
rain."

"Well, nobody with any sense cares if it rains Sunday and Monday," said
Penrod. "I wouldn't care if it rained every Sunday as long as I lived;
but I just like to know what's the reason it had to go and rain to-day.
Got all the days o' the week to choose from and goes and picks on
Saturday. That's a fine biz'nuss!"

"Well, in vacation----" Sam began, but at a sound from a source
invisible to him he paused. "What's that?" he said, somewhat startled.

It was a curious sound, loud and hollow and unhuman, yet it seemed to
be a cough. Both boys rose, and Penrod asked uneasily, "Where'd that
noise come from?"

"It's in the alley," said Sam.

Perhaps if the day had been bright, both of them would have stepped
immediately to the alley doors to investigate; but their actual
procedure was to move a little distance in the opposite direction. The
strange cough sounded again.

"_Say!_" Penrod quavered. "What _is_ that?"

Then both boys uttered smothered exclamations and jumped, for the long,
gaunt head which appeared in the doorway was entirely unexpected. It
was the cavernous and melancholy head of an incredibly thin, old,
whitish horse. This head waggled slowly from side to side; the nostrils
vibrated; the mouth opened, and the hollow cough sounded again.

Recovering themselves, Penrod and Sam underwent the customary human
reaction from alarm to indignation.

"What you want, you ole horse, you?" Penrod shouted. "Don't you come
coughin' around _me_!"

And Sam, seizing a stick, hurled it at the intruder.

"Get out o' here!" he roared.

The aged horse nervously withdrew his head, turned tail, and made a
rickety flight up the alley, while Sam and Penrod, perfectly obedient
to inherited impulse,[21-1] ran out into the drizzle and uproariously
pursued. They were but automatons of instinct,[21-2] meaning no evil.
Certainly they did not know the singular and pathetic history of the
old horse who had wandered into the alley and ventured to look through
the open door.

This horse, about twice the age of either Penrod or Sam, had lived to
find himself in a unique position. He was nude, possessing neither
harness nor halter; all he had was a name, Whitey, and he would have
answered to it by a slight change of expression if any one had thus
properly addressed him. So forlorn was Whitey's case, he was actually
an independent horse; he had not even an owner. For two days and a half
he had been his own master.

Previous to that period he had been the property of one Abalene Morris,
a person of color, who would have explained himself as engaged in the
hauling business. On the contrary, the hauling business was an
insignificant side line with Mr. Morris, for he had long ago given
himself, as utterly as fortune permitted, to that talent which, early
in youth, he had recognized as the greatest of all those surging in his
bosom. In his waking thoughts and in his dreams, in health and in
sickness, Abalene Morris was the dashing and emotional practitioner of
an art[22-1] probably more than Roman in antiquity. Abalene was a
crap-shooter. The hauling business was a disguise.

A concentration of events had brought it about that, at one and the
same time, Abalene, after a dazzling run of the dice, found the hauling
business an actual danger to the preservation of his liberty. He won
seventeen dollars and sixty cents, and within the hour found himself in
trouble with an officer of the Humane Society on account of an
altercation with Whitey. Abalene had been offered four dollars for
Whitey some ten days earlier; wherefore he at once drove to the shop of
the junk-dealer who had made the offer and announced his acquiescence
in the sacrifice.

"_No_, suh!" said the junk-dealer, with emphasis. "I awready done got
me a good mule fer my deliv'ry-hoss, 'n'at ole Whitey hoss ain' wuff no
fo' dollah nohow! I 'uz a fool when I talk 'bout th'owin' money roun'
that a-way. I know what _you_ up to, Abalene. Man come by here li'l bit
ago tole me all 'bout white man try to 'rest you, ovah on the avvynoo.
Yessuh; he say white man goin' to git you yit an' th'ow you in jail
'count o' Whitey. White man tryin' to fine out who you _is_. He say,
nemmine, he'll know Whitey ag'in, even if he don' know you! He say he
ketch you by the hoss; so you come roun' tryin' fix me up with Whitey
so white man grab me, th'ow _me_ in 'at jail. G'on 'way f'um hyuh, you
Abalene! You cain' sell an' you cain' give Whitey to no cullud man 'in
'is town. You go an' drowned 'at ole hoss, 'cause you sutny goin' to
jail if you git ketched drivin' him."

The substance of this advice seemed good to Abalene, especially as the
seventeen dollars and sixty cents in his pocket lent sweet colors to
life out of jail at this time. At dusk he led Whitey to a broad common
at the edge of town, and spoke to him finally.

"G'on 'bout you biz'nis," said Abalene; "you ain' _my_ hoss. Don' look
roun' at me, 'cause _I_ ain' got no 'quaintance wif you. I'm a man o'
money, an' I got my own frien's; I'm a-lookin' fer bigger cities, hoss.
You got you' biz'nis an' I got mine. Mista' Hoss, good-night!"

Whitey found a little frosted grass upon the common and remained there
all night. In the morning he sought the shed where Abalene had kept
him, but that was across the large and busy town, and Whitey was
hopelessly lost. He had but one eye; a feeble one; and his legs were
not to be depended upon; but he managed to cover a great deal of
ground, to have many painful little adventures, and to get monstrously
hungry and thirsty before he happened to look in upon Penrod and Sam.

When the two boys chased him up the alley, they had no intention to
cause pain; they had no intention at all. They were no more cruel than
Duke, Penrod's little old dog, who followed his own instincts, and,
making his appearance hastily through a hole in the back fence, joined
the pursuit with sound and fury. A boy will nearly always run after
anything that is running, and his first impulse is to throw a stone at
it. This is a survival of primeval man, who must take every chance to
get his dinner. So, when Penrod and Sam drove the hapless Whitey up the
alley, they were really responding to an impulse thousands and
thousands of years old--an impulse founded upon the primordial
observation that whatever runs is likely to prove edible. Penrod and
Sam were not "bad"; they were never that. They were something which was
not their fault; they were historic.

At the next corner Whitey turned to the right into the cross-street;
thence, turning to the right again and still warmly pursued, he
zigzagged down a main thoroughfare until he reached another
cross-street, which ran alongside the Schofields' yard and brought him
to the foot of the alley he had left behind in his flight. He entered
the alley, and there his dim eye fell upon the open door he had
previously investigated. No memory of it remained, but the place had a
look associated in his mind with hay, and as Sam and Penrod turned the
corner of the alley in panting yet still vociferous pursuit, Whitey
stumbled up the inclined platform before the open doors, staggered
thunderously across the carriage-house and through another open door
into a stall, an apartment vacant since the occupancy of Mr.
Schofield's last horse, now several years deceased.II

The two boys shrieked with excitement as they beheld the coincidence of
this strange return. They burst into the stable, making almost as much
noise as Duke, who had become frantic at the invasion. Sam laid hands
upon a rake.

"You get out o' there, you ole horse, you!" he bellowed. "I ain't
afraid to drive him out. I----"

"_Wait_ a minute!" shouted Penrod. "Wait till I----"

Sam was manfully preparing to enter the stall.

"You hold the doors open," he commanded, "so's they won't blow shut and
keep him in here. I'm goin' to hit him with----"

"Quee-_yut_!" Penrod shouted, grasping the handle of the rake so that
Sam could not use it. "Wait a _minute_, can't you?" He turned with
ferocious voice and gestures upon Duke. "_Duke!_" And Duke, in spite of
his excitement, was so impressed that he prostrated himself in silence,
and then unobtrusively withdrew from the stable. Penrod ran to the
alley doors and closed them.

"My gracious!" Sam protested. "What you goin' to do?"

"I'm goin' to keep this horse," said Penrod, whose face showed the
strain of a great idea.

"What _for_?"

"For the reward," said Penrod simply.

Sam sat down in the wheelbarrow and stared at his friend almost with
awe.

"My gracious," he said, "I never thought o' that! How--how much do you
think we'll get, Penrod?"

Sam's thus admitting himself to a full partnership in the enterprise
met no objection from Penrod, who was absorbed in the contemplation of
Whitey.

"Well," he said judicially, "we might get more and we might get less."

Sam rose and joined his friend in the doorway opening upon the two
stalls. Whitey had preempted the nearer, and was hungrily nuzzling the
old frayed hollows in the manger.

"May be a hundred dollars--or sumpthing?" Sam asked in a low voice.

Penrod maintained his composure and repeated the new-found expression
which had sounded well to him a moment before. He recognized it as a
symbol of the non-committal attitude that makes people looked up to.
"Well"--he made it slow, and frowned--"we might get more and we might
get less."

"More'n a hundred _dollars_?" Sam gasped.

"Well," said Penrod, "we might get more and we might get less." This
time, however, he felt the need of adding something. He put a question
in an indulgent tone, as though he were inquiring, not to add to his
own information but to discover the extent of Sam's. "How much do you
think horses are worth, anyway?"

"I don't know," said Sam frankly, and, unconsciously, he added, "They
might be more and they might be less."

"Well, when our ole horse died," said Penrod, "papa said he wouldn't
taken five hundred dollars for him. That's how much _horses_ are
worth!"

"My gracious!" Sam exclaimed. Then he had a practical afterthought.
"But maybe he was a better horse than this'n. What color was he?"

"He was bay. Looky here, Sam"--and now Penrod's manner changed from the
superior to the eager--"you look what kind of horses they have in a
circus, and you bet a circus has the _best_ horses, don't it? Well,
what kind of horses do they have in a circus? They have some black and
white ones, but the best they have are white all over. Well, what kind
of a horse is this we got here? He's perty near white right now, and I
bet if we washed him off and got him fixed up nice he _would_ be white.
Well, a bay horse is worth five hundred dollars, because that's what
papa said, and this horse----"

Sam interrupted rather timidly.

"He--he's awful bony, Penrod. You don't guess that'd make any----"

Penrod laughed contemptuously.

"Bony! All he needs is a little food and he'll fill right up and look
good as ever. You don't know much about horses, Sam, I expect. Why,
_our_ ole horse----"

"Do you expect he's hungry now?" asked Sam, staring at Whitey.

"Let's try him," said Penrod. "Horses like hay and oats the best, but
they'll eat most anything."

"I guess they will. He's tryin' to eat that manger up right now, and I
bet it ain't good for him."

"Come on," said Penrod, closing the door that gave entrance to the
stalls. "We got to get this horse some drinkin'-water and some good
food."

They tried Whitey's appetite first with an autumnal branch which they
wrenched from a hardy maple in the yard. They had seen horses nibble
leaves, and they expected Whitey to nibble the leaves of this branch,
but his ravenous condition did not allow him time for cool
discriminations. Sam poked the branch at him from the passageway, and
Whitey, after one backward movement of alarm, seized it venomously.
"Here! You stop that!" Sam shouted. "You stop that, you ole horse,
you!"

"What's the matter?" called Penrod from the hydrant, where he was
filling a bucket. "What's he doin' now?"

"Doin'! He's eatin' the wood part, too! He's chewin' up sticks as big
as baseball bats! He's crazy!"

Penrod rushed to see this sight, and stood aghast.

"Take it away from him, Sam!" he commanded sharply.

"Go on, take it away from him yourself!" was the prompt retort of his
comrade.

"You had no biz'nuss to give it to him," said Penrod. "Anybody with any
sense ought to know it'd make him sick. What'd you want to go and give
it to him for?"

"Well, you didn't say not to."

"Well, what if I didn't? I never said I did, did I? You go on in that
stall and take it away from him."

"_Yes_, I will!" Sam returned bitterly. Then, as Whitey had dragged the
remains of the branch from the manger to the floor of the stall, Sam
scrambled to the top of the manger and looked over. "There ain't much
left to _take_ away! He's swallered it all except some splinters.
Better give him the water to try and wash it down with." And, as Penrod
complied, "My gracious, look at that horse _drink_!"

They gave Whitey four buckets of water, and then debated the question
of nourishment. Obviously, this horse could not be trusted with
branches, and, after getting their knees black and their backs sodden,
they gave up trying to pull enough grass to sustain him. Then Penrod
remembered that horses like apples, both "cooking-apples" and
"eating-apples," and Sam mentioned the fact that every autumn his
father received a barrel of "cooking-apples" from a cousin who owned a
farm. That barrel was in the Williams' cellar now, and the cellar was
providentially supplied with "outside doors," so that it could be
visited without going through the house. Sam and Penrod set forth for
the cellar.

They returned to the stable bulging, and, after a discussion of
Whitey's digestion (Sam claiming that eating the core and seeds, as
Whitey did, would grow trees in his inside), they went back to the
cellar for supplies again--and again. They made six trips, carrying
each time a capacity cargo of apples, and still Whitey ate in a
famished manner. They were afraid to take more apples from the barrel,
which began to show conspicuously the result of their raids, wherefore
Penrod made an unostentatious visit to the cellar of his own house.
From the inside he opened a window and passed vegetables out to Sam,
who placed them in a bucket and carried them hurriedly to the stable,
while Penrod returned in a casual manner through the house. Of his
_sang-froid_[30-1] under a great strain it is sufficient to relate
that, in the kitchen, he said suddenly to Della, the cook, "Oh, look
behind you!" and by the time Della discovered that there was nothing
unusual behind her, Penrod was gone, and a loaf of bread from the
kitchen table was gone with him.

Whitey now ate nine turnips, two heads of lettuce, one cabbage, eleven
raw potatoes, and the loaf of bread. He ate the loaf of bread last and
he was a long time about it; so the boys came to a not unreasonable
conclusion.

"Well, sir, I guess we got him filled up at last!" said Penrod. "I bet
he wouldn't eat a saucer of ice-cream now, if we'd give it to him!"

"He looks better to me," said Sam, staring critically at Whitey. "I
think he's kind of begun to fill out some. I expect he must like us,
Penrod; we been doin' a good deal for this horse."

"Well, we got to keep it up," Penrod insisted rather pompously. "Long
as _I_ got charge o' this horse, he's goin' to get good treatment."

"What we better do now, Penrod?"

Penrod took on the outward signs of deep thought.

"Well, there's plenty to _do_, all right. I got to think."

Sam made several suggestions, which Penrod--maintaining his air of
preoccupation--dismissed with mere gestures.

"Oh, _I_ know!" Sam cried finally. "We ought to wash him so's he'll
look whiter'n what he does now. We can turn the hose on him acrost the
manger."

"No; not yet," said Penrod. "It's too soon after his meal. You ought to
know that yourself. What we got to do is to make up a bed for him--if
he wants to lay down or anything."

"Make up a what for him?" Sam echoed, dumfounded. "What you talkin'
about? How can----"

"Sawdust," said Penrod. "That's the way the horse we used to have used
to have it. We'll make this horse's bed in the other stall, and then he
can go in there and lay down whenever he wants to."

"How we goin' to do it?"

"Look, Sam; there's the hole into the sawdust-box! All you got to do is
walk in there with the shovel, stick the shovel in the hole till it
gets full of sawdust, and then sprinkle it around on the empty stall."

"All _I_ got to do!" Sam cried. "What are you goin' to do?"

"I'm goin' to be right here," Penrod answered reassuringly. "He won't
kick or anything, and it isn't goin' to take you half a second to slip
around behind him to the other stall."

"What makes you think he won't kick?"

"Well, I _know_ he won't, and, besides, you could hit him with the
shovel if he tried to. Anyhow, I'll be right here, won't I?"

"I don't care where you are," Sam said earnestly. "What difference
would that make if he ki----"

"Why, you were goin' right in the stall," Penrod reminded him. "When he
first came in, you were goin' to take the rake and----"

"I don't care if I was," Sam declared. "I was excited then."

"Well, you can get excited now, can't you?" his friend urged. "You can
just as easy get----"

He was interrupted by a shout from Sam, who was keeping his eye upon
Whitey throughout the discussion.

"Look! Looky there!" And undoubtedly renewing his excitement, Sam
pointed at the long, gaunt head beyond the manger. It was disappearing
from view. "Look!" Sam shouted. "He's layin' down!"

"Well, then," said Penrod, "I guess he's goin' to take a nap. If he
wants to lay down without waitin' for us to get the sawdust fixed for
him, that's his lookout, not ours."

On the contrary, Sam perceived a favorable opportunity for action.

"I just as soon go and make his bed up while he's layin' down," he
volunteered. "You climb up on the manger and watch him, Penrod, and
I'll sneak in the other stall and fix it all up nice for him, so's he
can go in there any time when he wakes up, and lay down again, or
anything; and if he starts to get up, you holler and I'll jump out over
the other manger."

Accordingly, Penrod established himself in a position to observe the
recumbent figure. Whitey's breathing was rather labored but regular,
and, as Sam remarked, he looked "better," even in his slumber. It is
not to be doubted that, although Whitey was suffering from a light
attack of colic, his feelings were in the main those of contentment.
After trouble, he was solaced; after exposure, he was sheltered; after
hunger and thirst, he was fed and watered. He slept.

The noon whistles blew before Sam's task was finished, but by the time
he departed for lunch there was made a bed of such quality that Whitey
must needs have been born faultfinder if he complained of it. The
friends parted, each urging the other to be prompt in returning, but
Penrod got into threatening difficulties as soon as he entered the
house.III

"Penrod," said his mother, "what did you do with that loaf of bread
Della says you took from the table?"

"Ma'am? _What_ loaf o' bread?"

"I believe I can't let you go outdoors this afternoon," Mrs. Schofield
said severely. "If you were hungry, you know perfectly well all you had
to do was to----"

"But I wasn't hungry; I----"

"You can explain later," said Mrs. Schofield. "You'll have all
afternoon."

Penrod's heart grew cold.

"I _can't_ stay in," he protested. "I've asked Sam Williams to come
over."

"I'll telephone Mrs. Williams."

"Mamma!" Penrod's voice became agonized. "I _had_ to give that bread to
a--to a poor ole man. He was starving and so were his children and his
wife. They were all just _starving_--and they couldn't wait while I
took time to come and ask you, mamma. I _got_ to go outdoors this
afternoon. I _got_ to! Sam's----"

She relented.

In the carriage-house, half an hour later, Penrod gave an account of
the episode.

"Where'd we been, I'd just like to know," he concluded, "if I hadn't
got out here this afternoon?"

"Well, I guess I could managed him all right," said Sam. "I was in the
passageway, a minute ago, takin' a look at him. He's standin' up agin.
I expect he wants more to eat."

"Well, we got to fix about that," said Penrod. "But what I mean--if I'd
had to stay in the house, where would we been about the most important
thing in the whole biz'nuss?"

"What you talkin' about?"

"Well, why can't you wait till I tell you?" Penrod's tone had become
peevish. For that matter, so had Sam's; they were developing one of the
little differences, or quarrels, that composed the very texture of
their friendship.

"Well, why don't you tell me, then?"

"Well, how can I?" Penrod demanded. "You keep talkin' every minute."

"I'm not talkin' _now_, am I?" Sam protested. "You can tell me _now_,
can't you? I'm not talk----"

"You are, too!" shouted Penrod. "You talk all the time! You----"

He was interrupted by Whitey's peculiar cough. Both boys jumped and
forgot their argument.

"He means he wants some more to eat, I bet," said Sam.

"Well, if he does, he's got to wait," Penrod declared. "We got to get
the most important thing of all fixed up first."

"What's that, Penrod?"

"The reward," said Penrod mildly. "That's what I was tryin' to tell you
about, Sam, if you'd ever give me half a chance."

"Well, I _did_ give you a chance. I kept _tellin'_ you to tell me,
but----"

"You never! You kept sayin'----"

They renewed this discussion, protracting it indefinitely; but as each
persisted in clinging to his own interpretation of the facts, the
question still remains unsettled. It was abandoned, or rather, it
merged into another during the later stages of the debate, this other
being concerned with which of the debaters had the least "sense." Each
made the plain statement that if he were more deficient than his
opponent in that regard, self-destruction would be his only refuge.
Each declared that he would "rather die than be talked to death"; and
then, as the two approached a point bluntly recriminative, Whitey
coughed again, whereupon they were miraculously silent, and went into
the passageway in a perfectly amiable manner.

"I got to have a good look at him, for once," said Penrod, as he stared
frowningly at Whitey. "We got to fix up about that reward."

"I want to take a good ole look at him myself," said Sam.

After supplying Whitey with another bucket of water, they returned to
the carriage-house and seated themselves thoughtfully. In truth, they
were something a shade more than thoughtful; the adventure to which
they had committed themselves was beginning to be a little
overpowering. If Whitey had been a dog, a goat, a fowl, or even a stray
calf, they would have felt equal to him; but now that the earlier glow
of their wild daring had disappeared, vague apprehensions stirred.
Their "good look" at Whitey had not reassured them--he seemed large,
Gothic,[36-1] and unusual.

Whisperings within them began to urge that for boys to undertake an
enterprise connected with so huge an animal as an actual horse was
perilous. Beneath the surface of their musings, dim but ominous
prophecies moved; both boys began to have the feeling that, somehow,
this affair was going to get beyond them and that they would be in
heavy trouble before it was over--they knew not why. They knew why no
more than they knew why they felt it imperative to keep the fact of
Whitey's presence in the stable a secret from their respective
families, but they did begin to realize that keeping a secret of that
size was going to be attended with some difficulty. In brief, their
sensations were becoming comparable to those of the man who stole a
house.

Nevertheless, after a short period given to unspoken misgivings, they
returned to the subject of the reward. The money-value of bay horses,
as compared to white, was again discussed, and each announced his
certainty that nothing less than "a good ole hundred dollars" would be
offered for the return of Whitey.

But immediately after so speaking they fell into another silence, due
to sinking feelings. They had spoken loudly and confidently, and yet
they knew, somehow, that such things were not to be. According to their
knowledge, it was perfectly reasonable to suppose that they would
receive this fortune, but they frightened themselves in speaking of it;
they knew that they _could_ not have a hundred dollars for their
own. An oppression, as from something awful and criminal, descended
upon them at intervals.

Presently, however, they were warmed to a little cheerfulness again by
Penrod's suggestion that they should put a notice in the paper. Neither
of them had the slightest idea how to get it there, but such details as
that were beyond the horizon; they occupied themselves with the
question of what their advertisement ought to "say." Finding that they
differed irreconcilably, Penrod went to a cache of his in the
sawdust-box and brought two pencils and a supply of paper. He gave one
of the pencils and several sheets to Sam; then both boys bent
themselves in silence to the labor of practical composition. Penrod
produced the briefer paragraph. (See Fig. I.) Sam's was more ample.
(See Fig. II.)

[Illustration: FIG I]

[Illustration: FIG II]

Neither Sam nor Penrod showed any interest in what the other had
written, but both felt that something praiseworthy had been
accomplished. Penrod exhaled a sigh, as of relief, and, in a manner he
had observed his father use sometimes, he said:

"Thank goodness, _that's_ off my mind, anyway!"

"What we goin' do next, Penrod?" Sam asked deferentially, the borrowed
manner having some effect upon him.

"I don't know what _you're_ goin' to do," Penrod returned, picking up
the old cigar box which had contained the paper and pencils. _"I'm_
goin' to put mine in here, so's it'll come in handy when I haf to get
at it."

"Well, I guess I'll keep mine there, too," said Sam. Thereupon he
deposited his scribbled slip beside Penrod's in the cigar box, and the
box was solemnly returned to the secret place whence it had been taken.

"There, _that's_ 'tended to!" said Sam, and, unconsciously imitating
his friend's imitation, he gave forth audibly a breath of satisfaction
and relief. Both boys felt that the financial side of their great
affair had been conscientiously looked to, that the question of the
reward was settled, and that everything was proceeding in a
businesslike manner. Therefore, they were able to turn their attention
to another matter.

This was the question of Whitey's next meal. After their exploits of
the morning, and the consequent imperilment of Penrod, they decided
that nothing more was to be done in apples, vegetables, or bread; it
was evident that Whitey must be fed from the bosom of nature.

"We couldn't pull enough o' that frostbit ole grass in the yard to feed
him," Penrod said gloomily. "We could work a week and not get enough to
make him swaller more'n about twice. All we got this morning, he blew
most of it away. He'd try to scoop it in toward his teeth with his lip,
and then he'd haf to kind of blow out his breath, and after that all
the grass that'd be left was just some wet pieces stickin' to the
outsides of his face. Well, and you know how he acted about that maple
branch. We can't trust him with branches."

Sam jumped up.

"_I_ know!" he cried. "There's lots of leaves left on the branches. We
can give them to him."

"I just said----"

"I don't mean the branches," Sam explained. "We'll leave the branches
on the trees, but just pull the leaves off the branches and put 'em in
the bucket and feed 'em to him out the bucket."

Penrod thought this plan worth trying, and for three-quarters of an
hour the two boys were busy with the lower branches of various trees in
the yard. Thus they managed to supply Whitey with a fair quantity of
wet leaves, which he ate in a perfunctory way, displaying little of his
earlier enthusiasm. And the work of his purveyors might have been more
tedious if it had been less damp, for a boy is seldom bored by anything
that involves his staying-out in the rain without protection. The
drizzle had thickened; the leaves were heavy with water, and at every
jerk the branches sent fat drops over the two collectors. They attained
a noteworthy state of sogginess.

Finally, they were brought to the attention of the authorities indoors,
and Della appeared upon the back porch.

"Musther Penrod," she called, "y'r mamma says ye'll c'm in the house
this minute an' change y'r shoes an' stockin's an' everythun' else ye
got on! D'ye hear me?"

Penrod, taken by surprise and unpleasantly alarmed, darted away from
the tree he was depleting and ran for the stable.

"You tell her I'm dry as toast!" he shouted over his shoulder.

Della withdrew, wearing the air of a person gratuitously insulted; and
a moment later she issued from the kitchen, carrying an umbrella. She
opened it and walked resolutely to the stable.

"She says I'm to bring ye in the house," said Della, "an' I'm goin' to
bring ye!"

Sam had joined Penrod in the carriage-house, and, with the beginnings
of an unnamed terror, the two beheld this grim advance. But they did
not stay for its culmination. Without a word to each other they
hurriedly tiptoed up the stairs to the gloomy loft, and there they
paused, listening.

They heard Della's steps upon the carriage-house floor.

"Ah, there's plenty places t'hide in," they heard her say; "but I'll
show ye! She tole me to bring ye, and I'm----"

She was interrupted by a peculiar sound--loud, chilling, dismal, and
unmistakably not of human origin. The boys knew it for Whitey's cough,
but Della had not their experience. A smothered shriek reached their
ears; there was a scurrying noise, and then, with horror, they heard
Della's footsteps in the passageway that ran by Whitey's manger.
Immediately there came a louder shriek, and even in the anguish of
knowing their secret discovered, they were shocked to hear distinctly
the words, "O Lard in hivvin!" in the well-known voice of Della. She
shrieked again, and they heard the rush of her footfalls across the
carriage-house floor. Wild words came from the outer air, and the
kitchen door slammed violently. It was all over. She had gone to
"tell."

Penrod and Sam plunged down the stairs and out of the stable. They
climbed the back fence and fled up the alley. They turned into Sam's
yard, and, without consultation, headed for the cellar doors, nor
paused till they found themselves in the farthest, darkest, and
gloomiest recess of the cellar. There, perspiring, stricken with fear,
they sank down upon the earthen floor, with their moist backs against
the stone wall.

Thus with boys. The vague apprehensions that had been creeping upon
Penrod and Sam all afternoon had become monstrous; the unknown was
before them. How great their crime would turn out to be (now that it
was in the hands of grown people), they did not know, but, since it
concerned a horse, it would undoubtedly be considered of terrible
dimensions.

Their plans for a reward, and all the things that had seemed both
innocent and practical in the morning, now staggered their minds as
manifestations of criminal folly. A new and terrible light seemed to
play upon the day's exploits; they had chased a horse belonging to
strangers, and it would be said that they deliberately drove him into
the stable and there concealed him. They had, in truth, virtually
stolen him, and they had stolen food for him. The waning light through
the small window above them warned Penrod that his inroads upon the
vegetables in his own cellar must soon be discovered. Della, that
Nemesis,[43-1] would seek them in order to prepare them for dinner, and
she would find them not. But she would recall his excursion to the
cellar, for she had seen him when he came up; and also the truth would
be known concerning the loaf of bread. Altogether, Penrod felt that his
case was worse than Sam's--until Sam offered a suggestion which roused
such horrible possibilitites concerning the principal item of their
offense that all thought of the smaller indictments disappeared.

"Listen, Penrod," Sam quavered: "What--what if that--what if that ole
horse maybe b'longed to a--policeman!" Sam's imagination was not of the
comforting kind. "What'd they--do to us, Penrod, if it turned out he
was some policeman's horse?"

Penrod was able only to shake his head. He did not reply in words, but
both boys thenceforth considered it almost inevitable that Whitey _had_
belonged to a policeman, and in their sense of so ultimate a disaster,
they ceased for a time to brood upon what their parents would probably
do to them. The penalty for stealing a policeman's horse would be only
a step short of capital, they were sure. They would not be hanged; but
vague, looming sketches of something called the penitentiary began to
flicker before them.

It grew darker in the cellar, so that finally they could not see each
other.

"I guess they're huntin' for us by now," Sam said huskily. "I don't--I
don't like it much down here, Penrod."

Penrod's hoarse whisper came from the profound gloom:

"Well, who ever said you did?"

"Well----" Sam paused; then he said plaintively, "I wish we'd never
_seen_ that dern ole horse."

"It was every bit his fault," said Penrod. "_We_ didn't do anything. If
he hadn't come stickin' his ole head in our stable, it'd never happened
at all. Ole fool!" He rose. "I'm goin' to get out of here; I guess I've
stood about enough for one day."

"Where--where you goin', Penrod? You aren't goin' _home_, are you?"

"No; I'm not! What do you take me for? You think I'm crazy?"

"Well, where _can_ you go?"

How far Penrod's desperation actually would have led him is doubtful,
but he made this statement:

"I don't know where _you're_ goin', but _I'm_ goin' to walk straight
out in the country till I come to a farm-house and say my name's George
and live there!"

"I'll do it, too," Sam whispered eagerly. "I'll say my name's Henry."

"Well, we better get started," said the executive Penrod. "We got to
get away from here, anyway."

But when they came to ascend the steps leading to the "outside doors,"
they found that those doors had been closed and locked for the night.

"It's no use," Sam lamented, "and we can't bust 'em, cause I tried to,
once before. Fanny always locks 'em about five o'clock--I forgot. We
got to go up the stairway and try to sneak out through the house."

They tiptoed back, and up the inner stairs. They paused at the top,
then breathlessly stepped out into a hall which was entirely dark. Sam
touched Penrod's sleeve in warning, and bent to listen at a door.

Immediately that door opened, revealing the bright library, where sat
Penrod's mother and Sam's father.

It was Sam's mother who had opened the door.

"Come into the library, boys," she said. "Mrs. Schofield is just
telling us about it."

And as the two comrades moved dumbly into the lighted room, Penrod's
mother rose, and, taking him by the shoulder, urged him close to the
fire.

"You stand there and try to dry off a little, while I finish telling
Mr. and Mrs. Williams about you and Sam," she said. "You'd better make
Sam keep near the fire, too, Mrs. Williams, because they both got
wringing wet. Think of their running off just when most people would
have wanted to stay! Well, I'll go on with the story, then. Della told
me all about it, and what the cook next door said _she'd_ seen, how
they'd been trying to pull grass and leaves for the poor old thing all
day--and all about the apples they carried from _your_ cellar, and
getting wet and working in the rain as hard as they could--and they'd
given him a loaf of bread! Shame on you, Penrod!" She paused to laugh,
but there was a little moisture round her eyes, even before she
laughed. "And they'd fed him on potatoes and lettuce and cabbage and
turnips out of _our_ cellar! And I wish you'd see the sawdust bed they
made for him! Well, when I'd telephoned, and the Humane Society man got
there, he said it was the most touching thing he ever knew. It seems he
_knew_ this horse, and had been looking for him. He said ninety-nine
boys out of a hundred would have chased the poor old thing away, and he
was going to see to it that this case didn't go unnoticed, because the
local branch of the society gives little silver medals for special acts
like this. And the last thing he said before he led the poor old horse
away was that he was sure Penrod and Sam each would be awarded one at
the meeting of the society next Thursday night."

... On the following Saturday morning a yodel sounded from the sunny
sidewalk in front of the Schofields' house, and Penrod, issuing forth,
beheld the familiar figure of Samuel Williams in waiting.

Upon Sam's breast there glittered a round bit of silver suspended by a
white ribbon from a bar of the same metal. Upon the breast of Penrod
was a decoration precisely similar.

"'Lo, Penrod," said Sam. "What you goin' to do?"

"Nothin'."

"I got mine on," said Sam.

"I have, too," said Penrod. "I wouldn't take a hundred dollars for
mine."

Each glanced pleasantly at the other's medal. They faced each other
without shame. Neither had the slightest sense of hypocrisy either in
himself or in his comrade. On the contrary!

Penrod's eyes went from Sam's medal back to his own; thence they
wandered, with perhaps a little disappointment, to the lifeless street
and to the empty yards and spectatorless windows of the neighborhood.
Then he looked southward toward the busy heart of the town, where
multitudes were.

"Let's go down and see what time it is by the court-house clock," said
Penrod.