I

When the assistant in the history department announced to Professor
Endicott his intention of spending several months in Paris to complete
the research work necessary to his doctor's dissertation,[114-1] the
head of the department looked at him with an astonishment so
unflattering in its significance that the younger man laughed aloud.

"You didn't think I had it in me to take it so seriously, did you,
Prof?" he said, with his usual undisturbed and amused perception of the
other's estimate of him. "And you're dead right, too! I'm doing it
because I've got to, that's all. It's borne in on me that you can't
climb up very fast in modern American universities unless you've got a
doctor's degree, and you can't be a Ph.D. without having dug around
some in a European library. I've picked out a subject that needs just
as little of that as any--you know as well as I do that right here in
Illinois I can find out everything that's worth knowing about the early
French explorers of the Mississippi--but three months in the
Archives[114-2] in Paris ought to put a polish on my dissertation that
will make even Columbia and Harvard sit up and blink. Am I right in my
calculations?"

Professor Endicott's thin shoulders executed a resigned shrug. "You are
always right in your calculations, my dear Harrison," he said; adding,
with an ambiguous intonation, "And I suppose I am to salute in you the
American scholar of the future."

Harrison laughed again without resentment, and proceeded indulgently to
reassure his chief. "No, sir, you needn't be alarmed. There'll always
be enough American-born scholars to keep you from being lonesome, just
as there'll always be others like me, that don't pretend to have a
drop of real scholar's blood in them. I want to _teach!_--to teach
history!--American history!--teach it to fool young undergraduates who
don't know what kind of a country they've got, nor what they ought to
make out of it, now they've got it. And I'm going in to get a Ph. D.
the same way I wear a stiff shirt and collars and cuffs, not because I
was brought up to believe in them as necessary to salvation--because I
wasn't, Lord knows!--but because there's a prejudice in favor of them
among the people I've got to deal with." He drew a long breath and went
on, "Besides, Miss Warner and I have been engaged about long enough. I
want to earn enough to get married on, and Ph. D. means advancement."

Professor Endicott assented dryly: "That is undoubtedly just what it
means nowadays. But you will 'advance,' as you call it, under any
circumstances. You will not remain a professor of history. I give you
ten years to be president of one of our large Western universities."

His accent made the prophecy by no means a compliment, but Harrison
shook his hand with undiminished good-will. "Well, Prof, if I am, my
first appointment will be to make you head of the history department
with twice the usual salary, and only one lecture a week to deliver to
a class of four P.G's--post-graduates, you know. I know a scholar when
I see one, if I don't belong to the tribe myself, and I know how they
ought to be treated."

If, in his turn, he put into a neutral phrase an ironical significance,
it was hidden by the hearty and honest friendliness of his keen, dark
eyes as he delivered this farewell.

The older man's ascetic face relaxed a little. "You are a good fellow,
Harrison, and I'm sure I wish you any strange sort of success you
happen to desire."

"Same to you, Professor. If I thought it would do any good, I'd run
down from Paris to Munich[116-1] with a gun and try scaring the editor
of the _Central-Blatt_ into admitting that you're right about that
second clause in the treaty of Utrecht."[116-2]

Professor Endicott fell back into severity. "I'm afraid," he observed,
returning to the papers on his desk, "I'm afraid that would not be a
very efficacious method of determining a question of historical
accuracy."

Harrison settled his soft hat firmly on his head. "I suppose you're
right," he remarked, adding as he disappeared through the door, "But
more's the pity!"II

He made short work of settling himself in Paris, taking a cheap
furnished room near the Bibliotheque Nationale,[117-1] discovering at
once the inexpensive and nourishing qualities of _cremeries_ and
the Duval restaurants, and adapting himself to the eccentricities of
Paris weather in March with flannel underwear and rubber overshoes. He
attacked the big folios in the library with ferocious energy, being the
first to arrive in the huge, quiet reading-room, and leaving it only at
the imperative summons of the authorities. He had barely enough money
to last through March, April, and May, and, as he wrote in his long
Sunday afternoon letters to Maggie Warner, he would rather work fifteen
hours a day now while he was fresh at it, than be forced to, later on,
when decent weather began, and when he hoped to go about a little and
make some of the interesting historical pilgrimages in the environs of
Paris.

He made a point of this writing his fiancee every detail of his plans,
as well as all the small happenings of his monotonous and laborious
life; and so, quite naturally, he described to her the beginning of his
acquaintance with Agatha Midland.

    "I'd spotted her for English," he wrote, "long before I happened to
    see her name on a notebook. Don't it sound like a made-up name out
    of an English novel? And that is the way she looks, too. I
    understand now why no American girl is ever called Agatha. To fit
    it you have to look sort of droopy all over, as if things weren't
    going to suit you, but you couldn't do anything to help it, and did
    not, from sad experience, have any rosy hopes that somebody would
    come along to fix things right. I'm not surprised that when English
    women do get stirred up over anything--for instance, like voting,
    nowadays--they fight like tiger-cats. If this Agatha-person is a
    fair specimen, they don't look as though they were used to getting
    what they want any other way. But here I go, like every other fool
    traveler, making generalizations about a whole nation from seeing
    one specimen. On the other side of me from Miss Midland usually
    sits an old German, grubbing away at Sanskrit roots. The other day
    we got into talk in the little lunchroom here in the same building
    with the library, where all we readers go to feed, and he made me
    so mad I couldn't digest my bread and milk. Once, just once, when
    he was real young, he met an American woman student--a regular P.
    G. freak, I gather--and nothing will convince him that all American
    girls aren't like her. 'May God forgive Christopher Columbus!' he
    groans whenever he thinks of her...."

There was no more in this letter about his English neighbor, but in the
next, written a week later, he said:

    "We've struck up an acquaintance, the discouraged-looking English
    girl and I, and she isn't so frozen-up as she seems. This is how it
    happened. I told you about the little lunchroom where the readers
    from the library get their noonday feed. Well, a day or so ago I
    was sitting at the next table to her, and when she'd finished
    eating and felt for her purse, I saw her get pale, and I knew right
    off she'd lost her money. 'If you'll excuse me, Miss Midland,' I
    said, 'I'll be glad to loan you a little. My name is Harrison,
    Peter Harrison, and I usually sit next you in the reading-room.'
    Say, Maggie, you don't know how queerly she looked at me. I can't
    tell you what her expression was like, for I couldn't make head or
    tail out of it. It was like looking at a Hebrew book that you don't
    know whether to read backward or forward. She got whiter, and drew
    away and said something about 'No! No! she couldn't think----' But
    there stood the waiter with his hand out. I couldn't stop to figure
    out if she was mad or scared. I said 'Look-y-here, Miss Midland,
    I'm an American--here's my card--I just want to help you out,
    that's all. You needn't be afraid I'll bother you any.' And with
    that I asked the waiter how much it was, paid him, and went out for
    my usual half-hour constitutional in the little park opposite the
    library.

    "When I went back to the reading-room, she was there in the seat
    next me, all right, but my, wasn't she buried in a big folio! She's
    studying in some kind of old music-books. You would have laughed to
    see how she didn't know I existed. I forgot all about her till
    closing-up time, but when I got out in the court a little ahead of
    her, I found it was raining and blowing to beat the cars, and I
    went back to hunt her up, I being the only person that knew she was
    broke. There she was, moping around in the vestibule under one of
    those awful pancake hats English women wear. I took out six
    cents--it costs that to ride in the omnibuses here--and I marched
    up to her. 'Miss Midland,' I said, 'excuse me again, but the
    weather is something terrible. You can't refuse to let me loan you
    enough to get home in a 'bus, for you would certainly catch your
    death of cold, not to speak of spoiling your clothes, if you tried
    to walk in this storm.'

    "She looked at me queerly again, drew in her chin, and said very
    fierce, 'No, certainly not! Some one always comes to fetch me
    away.'

    "Of course I didn't believe a word of _that_! It was just a bluff
    to keep from seeming to need anything. So I smiled at her and said,
    'That's all right, but suppose something happens this evening so he
    doesn't get here. I guess you'd better take the six sous--they
    won't hurt you any.' And I took hold of her hand, put the coppers
    in it, shut her fingers, took off my hat, and skipped out before
    she could get her breath. There are a _few_ times when women are so
    contrary you can't do the right thing by them without bossing them
    around a little.

    "Well, I thought sure if she'd been mad at noon she'd just be
    hopping mad over that last, but the next morning she came up to me
    in the vestibule and smiled at me, the funniest little wavery
    smile, as though she were trying on a brand-new expression. It made
    her look almost pretty. 'Good morning, Mr. Harrison,' she said in
    that soft, singsong tone English women have, 'here is your loan
    back again. I hope I have the sum you paid for my lunch
    correct--and thank you very much.'

    "I hated to take her little money, for her clothes are awfully
    plain and don't look as though she had any too much cash, but of
    course I did, and even told her that I'd given the waiter a
    three-cent tip she'd forgotten to figure in. When you _can_, I
    think it's only the square thing to treat women like human beings
    with sense, and I knew how I'd feel about being sure I'd returned
    all of a loan from a stranger. 'Oh, thank you for telling me,' she
    said, and took three more coppers out of her little purse; and by
    gracious! we walked into the reading-room as friendly as could be.

    "That was last Wednesday, and twice since then we've happened to
    take lunch at the same table, and have had a regular visit. It
    tickles me to see how scared she is yet of the idea that she's
    actually talking to a real man that hasn't been introduced to her,
    but I find her awfully interesting, she's so different."III

During the week that followed this letter, matters progressed rapidly.
The two Anglo-Saxons took lunch together every day, and by Friday the
relations between them were such that, as they pushed back their
chairs, Harrison said: "Excuse me, Miss Midland, for seeming to dictate
to you _all_ the time, but why in the world don't you go out after
lunch and take a half-hour's walk as I do? It'd be a lot better for
your health."

The English girl looked at him with the expression for which he had as
yet found no word more adequately descriptive than his vague "queer."
"I haven't exactly the habit of walking about Paris streets alone, you
know," she said.

"Oh, yes, to be sure," returned the American. "I remember hearing that
young ladies can't do that here the way they do back home. But that's
easy fixed. You won't be out in the streets, and you won't be alone, if
you come out with me in the little park opposite. Come on! It's the
first spring day."

Miss Midland dropped her arms with a gesture of helpless wonder. "Well,
_really_!" she exclaimed. "_Do_ you think that so much better?" But
she rose and prepared to follow him, as if her protest could not stand
before the kindly earnestness of his manner. "There!" he said, after he
had guided her across the street into the tiny green square where in
the sudden spring warmth, the chestnut buds were already swollen and
showing lines of green. "To answer your question, I think it not only
better, but absolutely all right--O.K!"

They were sitting on a bench at one side of the fountain, whose
tinkling splash filled the momentary silence before she answered, "I
can't make it all out--" she smiled at him--"but I think you are right
in saying that it is all O.K." He laughed, and stretched out his long
legs comfortably. "You've got the idea. That's the way to get the good
of traveling and seeing other kinds of folks. You learn my queer slang
words, and I'll learn yours."

Miss Midland stared again, and she cried out, "_My_ queer slang words!
What can you mean?"

He rattled off a glib list: "Why, 'just fancy now,' and 'only think of
that!' and 'I dare say, indeed,' and a lot more."

"But they are not queer!" she exclaimed.

"They sound just as queer to me as 'O.K.' and 'I guess' do to you!" he
said triumphantly.

She blinked her eyes rapidly, as though taking in an inconceivable
idea, while he held her fixed with a steady gaze which lost none of its
firmness by being both good-humored and highly amused. Finally,
reluctantly, she admitted, "Yes, I see. You mean I'm insular."

"Oh, as to that, I mean we both are--that is, we are as ignorant as
stotin'-bottles of each other's ways of doing things. Only I want to
find out about your ways, and you don't about----"

She broke in hastily, "Ah, but I do want to find out about yours!
You--you make me very curious indeed." As she said this, she looked
full at him with a grave simplicity which was instantly reflected on
his own face.

"Well, Miss Midland," he said slowly, "maybe now's a good time to say
it, and maybe it's a good thing to say, since you _don't_ know about
our ways--to give you a sort of declaration of principles. I wasn't
brought up in very polite society--my father and mother were Iowa
farmer-folks, and I lost them early, and I've had to look out for
myself ever since I was fourteen, so I'm not very long on _polish_; but
let me tell you, as they say about other awkward people, I _mean_ well.
We're both poor students working together in a foreign country, and
maybe I can do something to make it pleasanter for you, as I would for
a fellow-student woman in my country. If I can, I'd like to, fine! I
want to do what's square by everybody, and by women specially. I don't
think they get a fair deal mostly. I think they've got as much sense as
men, and lots of them more, and I like to treat them accordingly. So
don't you mind if I do some Rube things that seem queer to you, and do
remember that you can be dead sure that I _never_ mean any harm."

He finished this speech with an urgent sincerity in his voice, quite
different from his usual whimsical note, and for a moment they looked
at each other almost solemnly, the girl's lips parted, her blue eyes
wide and serious. She flushed a clear rose-pink. "Why!" she said, "Why,
I _believe_ you!" Harrison broke the tension with a laugh. "And what is
there so surprising if you do?"

"I don't think," she said slowly, "that I ever saw any one before whom
I would believe if he said that last."

"Dear me!" cried Harrison, gaily, getting to his feet. "You'll make me
think you are a hardened cynic. Well, if you believe me, _that's_ all
right! And now, come on, let's walk a little, and you tell me why
English people treat their girls so differently from their boys. You
are a perfect gold mine of information to me, do you know it?"

"But I've always taken for granted most of the things you find so queer
about our ways. I thought that was the way they were, don't you see, by
the nature of things."

"_Aha_!" he said triumphantly. "You see another good of traveling! It
stirs a person up. If you can give me a lot of new facts, maybe I can
pay you back by giving you some new ideas."

"I think," said Miss Midland, with a soft energy, "I think you can,
indeed."IV

A week after this was the first of April, and when Harrison, as was his
wont, reached the reading-room a little before the opening hour, he
found a notice on the door to the effect that the fall of some
plastering from a ceiling necessitated the closing of the reading-room
for that day. A week of daily lunches and talks with Miss Midland had
given him the habit of communicating his ideas to her, and he waited
inside the vestibule for her to appear. He happened thus, as he had not
before, to see her arrival. Accompanied by an elderly person in black,
who looked, even to Harrison's inexperienced eyes, like a maid-servant,
she came rapidly in through the archway which led from the street to
the court. Here, halting a moment, she dismissed her attendant with a
gesture, and, quite unconscious of the young man's gaze upon her,
crossed the court diagonally with a free, graceful step. Observing her
thus at his leisure, Harrison was moved to the first and almost the
last personal comment upon his new friend. He did not as a rule notice
very keenly the outward aspect of his associates. "Well, by gracious,"
he said to himself, "if she's not quite a good-looker!--or would be if
she had money or gumption enough to put on a little more style!"

He took a sudden resolution and, meeting her at the foot of the steps,
laid his plan enthusiastically before her. It took her breath away.
"Oh, no, I _couldn't_," she exclaimed, looking about her helplessly as
if foreseeing already that she would yield. "What would people----?"

"Nobody would say a thing, because nobody would know about it. We could
go and get back here by the usual closing time, so that whoever comes
for you would never suspect--she's not very sharp, is she?"

"No, no. She's only what you would call my hired girl."

"Well, then, it's Versailles[125-1] for us. Here, give me your
portfolio to carry. Let's go by the tram line[125-2]--it's cheaper for
two poor folks."

On the way out he proposed, with the same thrifty motive, that they buy
provisions in the town, before they began their sight-seeing in the
chateau, and eat a picnic lunch somewhere in the park.

"Oh, anything you please now!" she answered with reckless
light-heartedness. "I'm quite lost already."

"There's nothing disreputable about eating sandwiches on the grass," he
assured her; and indeed, when they spread their simple provision out
under the great pines back of the Trianon, she seemed to agree with
him, eating with a hearty appetite, laughing at all his jokes, and,
with a fresh color and sparkling eyes, telling him that she had never
enjoyed a meal more.

"Good for you! That's because you work too hard at your old history of
music."--By this time each knew all the details of the other's
research--"You ought to have somebody right at hand to make you take
vacations and have a good time once in a while. You're too
conscientious."

Then, because he was quite frank and unconscious himself, he went on
with a simplicity which the most accomplished actor could not have
counterfeited, "That's what I'm always telling Maggie--Miss Warner.
She's the girl I'm engaged to."

He did not at the time remark, but afterward, in another land, he was
to recall with startling vividness the quick flash of her clear eyes
upon him and the fluttering droop of her eyelids. She finished her
eclair quietly, remarking, "So you are engaged?"

"Very much so," answered Harrison, leaning his back against the
pine-tree and closing his eyes, more completely to savor the faint
fragrance of new life which rose about them in the warm spring air,
like unseen incense.

Miss Midland stood up, shaking the crumbs from her skirt, and began
fitting her gloves delicately upon her slim and very white hands. After
a pause, "But how would she like _this_?" she asked.

Without opening his eyes, Harrison murmured, "She'd like it fine. She's
a great girl for outdoors."

His companion glanced down at him sharply, but in his tranquil and
half-somnolent face there was no trace of evasiveness. "I don't mean
the park, the spring weather," she went on, with a persistence which
evidently cost her an effort. "I mean your being here with another
girl. That would make an English woman jealous."

Harrison opened his dark eyes wide and looked at her in surprise. "You
don't understand--we're not flirting with each other, Maggie and
I--we're engaged." He added with an air of proffering a self-evident
explanation, "As good as married, you know."

Miss Midland seemed to find in the statement a great deal of material
for meditation, for after an "Ah!" which might mean anything, she sat
down on the other side of the tree, leaning her blonde head against its
trunk and staring up into the thick green branches. Somewhere near them
in an early-flowering yellow shrub a bee droned softly. After a time
she remarked as if to herself, "They must take marriage very seriously
in Iowa."

The young man aroused himself, to answer sleepily: "It's Illinois where
I live now--Iowa was where I grew up--but it's all the same. Yes, we
do."

After that there was another long, fragrant silence which lasted until
Harrison roused himself with a sigh, exclaiming that although he would
like nothing better than to sit right there till he took root, they had
yet to "do" the two Trianons and to see the state carriages. During
this sightseeing tour he repeated his performance of the morning in the
chateau, pouring out a flood of familiar, quaintly expressed historical
lore of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which made his
astonished listener declare he must have lived at that time.

"Nope!" he answered her. "Got it all out of Illinois libraries. Books
are great things if you're only willing to treat them right. And
history--by gracious! history is a study fit for the gods! All about
folks, and they are all that are worth while in the world!"

They were standing before the Grand Trianon as he said this, waiting
for the tram car, and as it came into sight he cried out artlessly, his
dark, aquiline face glowing with fervor, "I--I just _love_ folks!"

She looked at him curiously. "In all my life I never knew any one
before to say or think that." Some of his enthusiasm was reflected upon
her own fine, thoughtful face as a sort of wistfulness when she added,
"It must make you very happy. I wish I could feel so."

"You don't look at them right," he protested.

She shook her head. "No, we haven't known the same kind. I had never
even heard of the sort of people you seem to have known."

The tram car came noisily up to them, and no more was said.V

A notice posted the following day to the effect that for some time the
reading-room would be closed one day in the week for repairs, gave
Harrison an excuse for insisting on weekly repetitions of what he
called their historical picnics.

Miss Midland let herself be urged into these with a half-fearful
pleasure which struck the young American as pathetic. "Anybody can see
she's had mighty few good times in _her_ life," he told himself. They
"did" Fontainebleau,[129-1] Pierrefonds,[129-2] Vincennes,[129-3] and
Chantilly[129-4]--this last expedition coming in the first week of May,
ten days before Miss Midland was to leave Paris. They were again
favored by wonderfully fine spring weather, so warm that the girl
appeared in a light-colored cotton gown and a straw hat which, as her
friend told her, with the familiarity born of a month of almost
uninterrupted common life, made her look "for all the world like a
picture."

After their usual conscientious and minute examination of the objects
of historical interest, they betook themselves with their lunch-basket
to a quiet corner of the park, by a clear little stream, on the other
side of which a pair of white swans were building a nest. It was very
still, and what faint breeze there was barely stirred the trees. The
English girl took off her hat, and the sunlight on her blonde hair
added another glory to the spring day.

They ate their lunch with few words, and afterward sat in what seemed
to the American the most comfortable and companionable of silences,
idly watching a peacock unfold the flashing splendor of his plumage
before the old gray fountain. "My! My! My!" he murmured finally. "Isn't
the world about the best place!"

The girl did not answer, and, glancing at her, he was startled to see
that her lips were quivering. "Why, Miss Midland!" he cried anxiously.
"Have you had bad news?"

She shook her head. "Nothing new."

"What's the matter?" he asked, coming around in front of her. "Perhaps
I can help you even if it's only to give some good advice."

She looked up at him with a sudden flash. "I suppose that, since you
are so much engaged, you think you would make a good father-confessor!"

"I don't see that that has anything to do with it," he said, sitting
down beside her, "but you can bank on me for doing anything I can."

"You don't see that that has anything to do with it," she broke in
sharply, with the evident intention of wounding him, "because you are
very unworldly, what is usually called very unsophisticated."

If she had thought to pique him with this adjective, she was disarmed
by the heartiness of his admission, "As green as grass! But I'd like to
help you all the same, if I can."

"You don't care if you are?" she asked curiously.

"Lord no! What does it matter?"

"You may care then to know," she went on, still probing at him, "that
your not caring is the principal reason for my--finding you
interesting--for my liking you--as I do."

"Well, I'm interested to know that," he said reasonably, "but blessed
if I can see why. What difference does it make to _you_?"

"It's a great surprise to me," she said clearly. "I never met anybody
before who didn't care more about being sophisticated than about
anything else. To have you not even think of that--to have you think of
nothing but your work and how to 'mean well' as you say----" she
stopped, flushing deeply.

"Yes, it must be quite a change," he admitted sobered by her tone, but
evidently vague as to her meaning. "Well, I'm very glad you don't mind
my being as green as grass and as dense as a hitching-block. It's very
lucky for me."

A quick bitterness sprang into her voice. "I don't see," she echoed his
phrase, "what difference it makes to _you_!"

"Don't you?" he said, lighting a cigarette and not troubling himself to
discuss the question with her. She was evidently all on edge with
nerves, he thought, and needed to be calmed down. He pitied women for
their nerves, and was always kindly tolerant of the resultant
petulances.

She frowned and said with a tremulous resentment, as if gathering
herself together for a long-premediated attempt at self-defense.
"You're not only as green as grass, but you perceive nothing,--any
European, even the stupidest, would perceive what you--but you are as
primitive as a Sioux Indian, you have the silly morals of a
non-conformist preacher,--you're as brutal as----"

He opposed to this outburst the impregnable wall of a calm and
meditative silence. She looked angrily into his quiet eyes, which met
hers with unflinching kindness. The contrast between their faces was
striking--was painful.

She said furiously, "There is nothing to you except that you are
stronger than I, and you know it--and that _is_ brutal!" She paused a
long moment, quivering, and then relapsed into spent, defeated
lassitude,--"and I like it," she added under her breath, looking down
at her hands miserably.

"I don't mean to be brutal," he said peaceably. "I'm sorry if I am."

"Oh, it's no matter!" she said impatiently.

"All right, have it your own way," he agreed, good-naturedly, shifting
into a more comfortable position, and resuming his patient silence. He
might have been a slightly pre-occupied but indulgent parent, waiting
for a naughty child to emerge from a tantrum.

After a while, "Well, then," she began as though nothing had passed
between them since his offer to give her advice, "well then, if you
want to be father-confessor, tell me what you'd do in my place, if your
family expected you as a matter of course to--to----"

"What do they want you to do?" he asked as she hesitated.

"Oh, nothing that they consider at all formidable! Only what every girl
should do--make a good and suitable marriage, and bring up children to
go on doing what she had found no joy in."

"Don't you do it!" he said quietly. "Nobody believes more than I do in
marrying the right person. But just marrying so's to _be_ married--that's
Tophet! Red-hot Tophet!"[133-1]

"But what else is there for me to do?" she said, turning her eyes to
him with a desperate hope in his answer. "Tell me! My parents have
brought me up so that there is nothing I can fill my life with, if--I
think, on the whole, I will be more miserable if I don't than if I----"

"Why, look-y-here!" he said earnestly. "You're not a child, you're a
grown woman. You have your music. You could earn your living by that.
Great Scott! Earn your living scrubbing floors before you----"

She put her handkerchief to her eyes. "Ah, but I am so alone against
all my world! Now, here, with you, it seems easy but--without any one
to sustain me, to----"

Harrison went on: "Now let me give you a rule I believe in as I do in
the sun's rising. Never marry a man just because you think you could
manage to live with him. Don't do it unless you are dead sure you
couldn't live without him!"

She took down her handkerchief, showing a white face, whose expression
matched the quaver in her voice, as she said breathlessly: "But how if
I meet a man and feel I cannot live without him, and he is already--"
she brought it out squarely in the sunny peace,--"if he is already as
good as married!"

He took it with the most single-hearted simplicity. "Now it's you who
are unsophisticated and getting your ideas from fool novels. Things
don't happen that way in real life. Either the man keeps his marriage a
secret, in which case he is a sneak and not worth a second thought from
any decent woman, or else, if she had known all along that he was
married, she doesn't get to liking him that way. Don't you see?"

She looked away, down the stream for a moment with inscrutable eyes,
and then broke into an unexpected laugh, rising at the same time and
putting on her hat. "I see, yes, I see," she said. "It is as you say,
quite simple. And now let us go to visit the rest of the park."VI

The next excursion was to be their last, and Miss Midland had suggested
a return to Versailles to see the park in its spring glory. They
lunched in a little inclosure, rosy with the pink and white magnolia
blossoms, where the uncut grass was already ankle-deep and the
rose-bushes almost hid the gray stone wall with the feathery abundance
of their first pale green leaves. From a remark of the girl's that
perhaps this was the very spot where Marie Antoinette had once gathered
about her gay court of pseudo-milkmaids, they fell into a discussion of
that queen's pretty pastoral fancy. Harrison showed an unexpected
sympathy with the futile, tragic little merrymaker.

"I expect she got sick and tired of being treated like a rich, great
lady, and wanted to see what it would feel like to be a human being.
The king is always disguising himself as a goat-herd to make sure he
can be loved for his own sake."

"But those stories are all so monotonous!" she said impatiently. "The
king always is made to find out that the shepherdess does love him for
his own sake. What would happen if she wouldn't look at him?"

Harrison laughed, "Well, by George, I never thought of that. I should
say if he cared enough about her to want his own way, he'd better get
off his high-horse and say, 'Look-y-here, I'm not the common ordinary
mutt I look. I'm the king in disguise. _Now_ will you have me?"

Miss Midland looked at him hard. "Do you think it likely the girl would
have him then?"

"Don't you?" he said, still laughing, and tucking away the last of a
foie-gras sandwich.

She turned away, frowning, "I don't see how you can call _me_ cynical!"

He raised his eyebrows, "That's not cynical," he protested. "You have
to take folks the way they are, and not the way you think it would be
pretty to have them. It mightn't be the most dignified position for the
king, but I never did see the use of dignity that got in the way of
your having what you wanted."

She looked at him with so long and steady a gaze that only her patent
absence of mind kept it from being a stare. Then, "I think I will go
for a walk by myself," she said.

"Sure, if you want to," he assented, "and I'll take a nap under this
magnolia tree. I've been working late nights, lately."

When she came back after an hour, the little inclosure was quite still,
and, walking over to the magnolia, she saw that the young man had
indeed fallen soundly asleep, one arm under his head, the other flung
wide, half buried in the grass. For a long time she looked down gravely
at the powerful body, at the large, sinewy hand, relaxed like a
sleeping child's, at the eagle-like face, touchingly softened by its
profound unconsciousness.

Suddenly the dark eyes opened wide into hers. The young man gave an
exclamation and sat up, startled. At this movement she looked away,
smoothing a fold of her skirt. He stared about him, still half-asleep.
"Did I hear somebody call?" he asked. "I must have had a very vivid
dream of some sort--I thought somebody was calling desperately to me.
You didn't speak, did you?"

"No," she answered softly, "I said nothing."

"Well, I hope you'll excuse me for being such poor company. I only
meant to take a cat-nap. I hope we won't be too late for the train."

He scrambled to his feet, his eyes still heavy with sleep, and pulled
out his watch. As he did this, Miss Midland began to speak very
rapidly. What she said was so astonishing to him that he forgot to put
back his watch, forgot even to look at it, and stood with it in his
hand, staring at her, with an expression as near to stupefaction as his
keen and powerful face could show.

When she finally stopped to draw breath, the painful breath of a person
who has been under water too long, he broke into baroque ejaculations,
"Well, wouldn't that _get_ you! Wouldn't that absolutely freeze you to
a pillar of salt! Well, of all the darndest idiots, I've been the----"
With Miss Midland's eyes fixed on him, he broke into peal after peal
of his new-world laughter, his fresh, crude, raw, inimitably vital
laughter, "I'm thinking of the time I loaned you the franc and a half
for your lunch, and hated to take it back because I thought you needed
it--and you rich enough to buy ten libraries to Andy's[137-1] one! Say,
how did you keep your face straight!"

Miss Midland apparently found no more difficulty in keeping a straight
face now than then. She did not at all share his mirth. She was still
looking at him with a strained gaze as though she saw him with
difficulty, through a mist increasingly smothering. Finally, as though
the fog had grown quite too thick, she dropped her eyes, and very
passive, waited for his laughter to stop.

When it did, and the trees which had looked down on Marie Antoinette
had ceased echoing to the loud, metallic, and vigorous sound, he
noticed his watch still in his hand. He glanced at it automatically,
thrust it back into his pocket and exclaimed, quite serious again,
"Look-y-here. We'll have to step lively if we are going to catch that
train back to Paris, Miss Midland--Lady Midland, I mean,--Your
highness--what _do_ they call the daughter of an Earl? I never met
a real live member of the aristocracy before."

She moved beside him as he strode off towards the gate. "I am usually
called Lady Agatha," she answered, in a flat tone.

"How pretty that sounds!" he said heartily, "Lady Agatha! Lady Agatha!
Why don't we have some such custom in America?" He tried it
tentatively. "Lady Marietta--that's my mother's name--don't seem to fit
altogether does it? Lady Maggie--Oh, Lord! awful! No, I guess we'd
better stick to Miss and Mrs. But it _does_ fit Agatha fine!"

She made no rejoinder. She looked very tired and rather stern.

After they were on the train, she said she had a headache and preferred
not to talk and, ensconcing herself in a corner of the compartment,
closed her eyes. Harrison, refreshed by the outdoor air and his nap,
opened his notebook and began puzzling over a knotty point in one of
the French Royal Grants to LaSalle[138-1] which he was engaged at the
time in deciphering. Once he glanced up to find his companion's eyes
open and fixed on him. He thought to himself that her headache must be
pretty bad, and stirred himself to say with his warm, friendly accent,
"It's a perfect shame you feel so miserable! Don't you want me to open
the window? Wouldn't you like my coat rolled up for a pillow? Isn't
there something I can do for you?"

She looked at him, and closing her lips, shook her head.

Later, in the midst of a struggle over an archaic law-form, the
recollection of his loan to his fellow-student darted into his head. He
laid down his notebook to laugh again. She turned her head and looked a
silent question. "Oh, it's just that franc and a half!" he explained.
"I'll never get over that as long as I live!"

She pulled down her veil and turned away from him again.

When they reached Paris, he insisted that she take a carriage and go
home directly. "I'll go on to the reading-room and explain to your
hired girl that you were sick and couldn't wait for her." Before he
closed her into the cab he added, "But, look here! I won't see you
again, will I? I forgot you are going back to England to-morrow. Well,
to think of this being good-bye! I declare, I hate to say it!" He held
out his hand and took her cold fingers in his. "Well, Miss Midland, I
tell _you_ there's not a person in the world who can wish you better
luck than I do. You've been awfully good to me, and I appreciate it,
and I do hope that if there's ever any little thing I can do for you,
you'll let me know. I surely am yours to command."

The girl's capacity for emotion seemed to be quite exhausted, for she
answered nothing to this quaint valedictory beyond a faint, "Good-by,
Mr. Harrison, I hope you----" but she did not finish the sentence.