I do not believe that the most enthusiastic lover of that "useful and
noble animal," the horse, will claim for him the charm of geniality,
humor, or expansive confidence. Any creature who will not look you
squarely in the eye--whose only oblique glances are inspired by fear,
distrust, or a view to attack, who has no way of returning caresses,
and whose favorite expression is one of head-lifting disdain, may be
"noble" or "useful," but can be hardly said to add to the gayety of
nations. Indeed it may be broadly stated that, with the single
exception of gold-fish, of all animals kept for the recreation of
mankind the horse is alone capable of exciting a passion that shall be
absolutely hopeless. I deem these general remarks necessary to prove
that my unreciprocated affection for Chu Chu was not purely individual
or singular. And I may add that to these general characteristics she
brought the waywardness of her capricious sex.

She came to me out of the rolling dust of an emigrant wagon, behind
whose tailboard she was gravely trotting. She was a half-broken
colt--in which character she had at different times unseated everybody
in the train--and, although covered with dust, she had a beautiful coat
and the most lambent gazelle-like eyes I had ever seen. I think she
kept these latter organs purely for ornament--apparently looking at
things with her nose, her sensitive ears, and sometimes even a slight
lifting of her slim near foreleg. On our first interview I thought she
favored me with a coy glance, but as it was accompanied by an
irrelevant "Look out!" from her owner, the teamster, I was not certain.
I only know that after some conversation, a good deal of mental
reservation, and the disbursement of considerable coin, I found myself
standing in the dust of the departing emigrant wagon with one end of a
forty-foot _riata_ in my hand and Chu Chu at the other.

I pulled invitingly at my own end and even advanced a step or two
towards her. She then broke into a long disdainful pace and began to
circle round me at the extreme limit of her tether. I stood admiring
her free action for some moments--not always turning with her, which
was tiring--until I found that she was gradually winding herself up _on
me_! Her frantic astonishment when she suddenly found herself thus
brought up against me was one of the most remarkable things I ever saw
and nearly took me off my legs. Then when she had pulled against the
_riata_ until her narrow head and prettily arched neck were on a
perfectly straight line with it, she as suddenly slackened the tension
and condescended to follow me, at an angle of her own choosing.
Sometimes it was on one side of me, sometimes on the other. Even then
the sense of my dreadful contiguity apparently would come upon her like
a fresh discovery, and she would become hysterical. But I do not think
that she really _saw_ me. She looked at the _riata_ and sniffed it
disparagingly; she pawed some pebbles that were near me tentatively
with her small hoof; she started back with a Robinson-Crusoe-like
horror of my footprints in the wet gully, but my actual personal
presence she ignored. She would sometimes pause, with her head
thoughtfully between her forelegs, and apparently say, "There is some
extraordinary presence here: animal, vegetable, or mineral--I can't
make out which--but it's not good to eat, and I loathe and detest it."

When I reached my house in the suburbs, before entering the "fifty
vara" lot inclosure, I deemed it prudent to leave her outside while I
informed the household of my purchase; and with this object I tethered
her by the long _riata_ to a solitary sycamore which stood in the
centre of the road, the crossing of two frequented thoroughfares. It
was not long, however, before I was interrupted by shouts and screams
from that vicinity and on returning thither I found that Chu Chu, with
the assistance of her _riata_, had securely wound up two of my
neighbors to the tree, where they presented the appearance of early
Christian martyrs. When I released them, it appeared that they had been
attracted by Chu Chu's graces, and had offered her overtures of
affection, to which she had characteristically rotated with this
miserable result.

I led her, with some difficulty, warily keeping clear of the _riata_,
to the inclosure, from whose fence I had previously removed several
bars. Although the space was wide enough to have admitted a troop of
cavalry, she affected not to notice it and managed to kick away part of
another section on entering. She resisted the stable for some time, but
after carefully examining it with her hoofs and an affectedly meek
outstretching of her nose, she consented to recognize some oats in the
feed-box--without looking at them--and was formally installed. All this
while she had resolutely ignored my presence. As I stood watching her,
she suddenly stopped eating; the same reflective look came over her.
"Surely I am not mistaken, but that same obnoxious creature is
somewhere about here!" she seemed to say, and shivered at the
possibility.

It was probably this which made me confide my unreciprocated affection
to one of my neighbors--a man supposed to be an authority on horses,
and particularly of that wild species to which Chu Chu belonged. It was
he who, leaning over the edge of the stall where she was complacently
and, as usual, obliviously munching, absolutely dared to toy with a pet
lock of hair which she wore over the pretty star on her forehead. "Ye
see, captain," he said with jaunty easiness, "hosses is like wimmen; ye
don't want ter use any standoffishness or shyness with _them_; a stiddy
but keerless sort o' familiarity, a kind o' free but firm handlin',
jess like this, to let her see who's master----"

We never clearly knew _how_ it happened; but when I picked up my
neighbor from the doorway, amid the broken splinters of the stall rail
and a quantity of oats that mysteriously filled his hair and pockets,
Chu Chu was found to have faced around the other way and was
contemplating her forelegs, with her hind ones in the other stall. My
neighbor spoke of damages while he was in the stall, and of physical
coercion when he was out of it again. But here Chu Chu, in some
marvelous way, righted herself, and my neighbor departed hurriedly with
a brimless hat and an unfinished sentence.

My next intermediary was Enriquez Saltello--a youth of my age, and the
brother of Consuelo Saltello, whom I adored. As a Spanish Californian
he was presumed, on account of Chu Chu's half-Spanish origin, to have
superior knowledge of her character, and I even vaguely believed that
his language and accent would fall familiarly on her ear. There was the
drawback, however, that he always preferred to talk in a marvelous
English, combining Castilian[145-1] precision with what he fondly
believed to be Californian slang.

"To confer then as to thees horse, which is not--observe me--a Mexican
plug![145-2] Ah, no! you can your boots bet on that. She is of
Castilian stock--believe me and strike me dead! I will myself at
different times overlook and affront her in the stable, examine her as
to the assault, and why she should do thees thing. When she is of the
exercise, I will also accost and restrain her. Remain tranquil, my
friend! When a few days shall pass, much shall be changed, and she will
be as another. Trust your oncle do thees thing! Comprehend me!
Everything shall be lovely, and the goose hang high!"

Conformably with this, he "overlooked" her the next day, with a
cigarette between his yellow-stained finger tips, which made her sneeze
in a silent pantomimic way, and certain blandishments of speech which
she received with more complacency. But I don't think she ever even
looked at him. In vain he protested that she was the "dearest" and
"littlest" of his "little loves"--in vain he asserted that she was his
patron saint, and that it was his soul's delight to pray to her; she
accepted the compliment with her eyes fixed upon the manger. When he
had exhausted his whole stock of endearing diminutives, adding a few
playful and more audacious sallies, she remained with her head down, as
if inclined to meditate upon them. This he declared was at least an
improvement on her former performances. It may have been my own
jealousy, but I fancied she was only saying to herself, "Gracious! can
there be _two_ of them?"

"Courage and patience, my friend," he said, as we were slowly quitting
the stable. "Thees horse is yonge, and has not yet the habitude of the
person. To-morrow, at another season, I shall give to her a foundling"
("fondling," I have reason to believe, was the word intended by
Enriquez)--"and we shall see. It shall be as easy as to fall away from
a log. A leetle more of this chin music which your friend Enriquez
possesses, and some tapping of the head and neck, and you are there.
You are ever the right side up. Houp la! But let us not precipitate
this thing. The more haste, we do not so much accelerate ourselves."

He appeared to be suiting the action to the word as he lingered in the
doorway of the stable. "Come on," I said.

"Pardon," he returned, with a bow that was both elaborate and evasive,
"but you shall yourself precede me--the stable is _yours_."

"Oh, come along!" I continued impatiently. To my surprise, he seemed to
dodge back into the stable again. After an instant he reappeared.

"Pardon! but I am re-strain! Of a truth, in this instant I am grasp by
the mouth of thees horse in the coat-tail of my dress! She will that I
should remain. It would seem"--he disappeared again--"that"--he was out
once more--"the experiment is a sooccess! She reciprocate! She is, of a
truth, gone on me. It is lofe!"--a stronger pull from Chu Chu here sent
him in again--"but"--he was out now triumphantly with half his garment
torn away--"I shall coquet."

Nothing daunted, however, the gallant fellow was back next day with a
Mexican saddle and attired in the complete outfit of a _vaquero_.[147-1]
Overcome though he was by heavy deerskin trousers, open at the side
from the knees down, and fringed with bullion buttons, an enormous flat
_sombrero_,[147-2] and stiff, short embroidered velvet jacket, I was
more concerned at the ponderous saddle and equipments intended for the
slim Chu Chu. That these would hide and conceal her beautiful curves
and contour, as well as overweight her, seemed certain; that she would
resist them all to the last seemed equally clear. Nevertheless, to my
surprise, when she was led out, and the saddle thrown deftly across her
back, she was passive. Was it possible that some drop of her old
Spanish blood responded to its clinging embrace? She did not either
look at it nor smell it. But when Enriquez began to tighten the "cinch"
or girth, a more singular thing occurred. Chu Chu visibly distended her
slender barrel to twice its dimensions; the more he pulled the more she
swelled, until I was actually ashamed of her. Not so Enriquez. He
smiled at us, and complacently stroked his thin moustache.

"Eet is ever so! She is the child of her grandmother! Even when you
shall make saddle thees old Castilian stock, it will make large--it
will become a balloon! Eet is trick--eet is a leetle game--believe me.
For why?"

I had not listened, as I was at that moment astonished to see the
saddle slowly slide under Chu Chu's belly, and her figure resume, as if
by magic, its former slim proportions. Enriquez followed my eyes,
lifted his shoulders, shrugged them, and said smilingly, "Ah, you see!"

When the girths were drawn in again with an extra pull or two from the
indefatigable Enriquez, I fancied that Chu Chu nevertheless secretly
enjoyed it, as her sex is said to appreciate tight-lacing. She drew a
deep sigh, possibly of satisfaction, turned her neck, and apparently
tried to glance at her own figure--Enriquez promptly withdrawing to
enable her to do so easily. Then the dread moment arrived. Enriquez,
with his hand on her mane, suddenly paused and, with exaggerated
courtesy, lifted his hat and made an inviting gesture.

"You will honor me to precede."

I shook my head laughingly.

"I see," responded Enriquez gravely. "You have to attend the obsequies
of your aunt who is dead, at two of the clock. You have to meet your
broker who has bought you feefty share of the Comstock lode[149-1]--at
thees moment--or you are loss! You are excuse! Attend! Gentlemen, make
your bets! The band has arrived to play! 'Ere we are!"

With a quick movement the alert young fellow had vaulted into the
saddle. But, to the astonishment of both of us, the mare remained
perfectly still. There was Enriquez bolt upright in the stirrups,
completely overshadowing by his saddle-flaps, leggings, and gigantic
spurs the fine proportions of Chu Chu, until she might have been a
placid Rosinante,[149-2] bestridden by some youthful Quixote. She
closed her eyes, she was going to sleep! We were dreadfully
disappointed. This clearly would not do. Enriquez lifted the reins
cautiously! Chu Chu moved forward slowly--then stopped, apparently lost
in reflection.

"Affront her on thees side."

I approached her gently. She shot suddenly into the air, coming down
again on perfectly stiff legs with a springless jolt. This she
instantly followed by a succession of other rocket-like propulsions,
utterly unlike a leap, all over the inclosure. The movements of the
unfortunate Enriquez were equally unlike any equitation I ever saw. He
appeared occasionally over Chu Chu's head, astride her neck and tail,
or in the free air, but never in the saddle. His rigid legs, however,
never lost the stirrups, but came down regularly, accentuating her
springless hops. More than that, the disproportionate excess of rider,
saddle, and accoutrements was so great that he had, at times, the
appearance of lifting Chu Chu forcibly from the ground by superior
strength, and of actually contributing to her exercise! As they came
towards me, a wild tossing and flying mass of hoofs and spurs, it was
not only difficult to distinguish them apart, but to ascertain how much
of the jumping was done by Enriquez separately. At last Chu Chu brought
matters to a close by making for the low-stretching branches of an
oak-tree which stood at the corner of the lot. In a few moments she
emerged from it--but without Enriquez.

I found the gallant fellow disengaging himself from the fork of a
branch in which he had been firmly wedged, but still smiling and
confident, and his cigarette between his teeth. Then for the first time
he removed it, and seating himself easily on the branch with his legs
dangling down, he blandly waved aside my anxious queries with a gentle
reassuring gesture.

"Remain tranquil, my friend. Thees does not count! I have conquer--you
observe--for why? I have _never_ for once _arrive at the ground_!
Consequent she is disappoint! She will ever that I _should_! But I
have got her when the hair is not long! Your oncle Henry"--with an
angelic wink--"is fly! He is ever a bully boy, with the eye of glass!
Believe me. Behold! I am here! Big Injun! Whoop!"

He leaped lightly to the ground. Chu Chu, standing watchfully at a
little distance, was evidently astonished at his appearance. She threw
out her hind hoofs violently, shot up into the air until the stirrups
crossed each other high above the saddle, and made for the stable in a
succession of rabbit-like bounds--taking the precaution to remove the
saddle, on entering, by striking it against the lintel of the door.
"You observe," said Enriquez blandly, "she would make that thing of
_me_. Not having the good occasion, she ees dissatisfied. Where
are you now?"

Two or three days afterwards he rode her again with the same
result--accepted by him with the same heroic complacency. As we did
not, for certain reasons, care to use the open road for this exercise
and as it was impossible to remove the tree, we were obliged to submit
to the inevitable. On the following day I mounted her--undergoing the
same experience as Enriquez, with the individual sensation of falling
from a third-story window on top of a counting-house stool, and the
variation of being projected over the fence. When I found that Chu Chu
had not accompanied me, I saw Enriquez at my side. "More than ever it
is become necessary that we should do thees things again," he said
gravely, as he assisted me to my feet. "Courage, my noble General! God
and Liberty! Once more on to the breach! Charge, Chestare, charge! Come
on, Don Stanley! 'Ere we are!"

He helped me none too quickly to catch my seat again, for it apparently
had the effect of the turned peg on the enchanted horse in the Arabian
Nights,[152-1] and Chu Chu instantly rose into the air. But she came
down this time before the open window of the kitchen, and I alighted
easily on the dresser. The indefatigable Enriquez followed me.

"Won't this do?" I asked meekly.

"It ees _better_--for you arrive _not_ on the ground," he said
cheerfully; "but you should not once but a thousand times make trial!
Ha! Go and win! Nevare die and say so! 'Eave ahead! 'Eave! There you
are!"

Luckily, this time I managed to lock the rowels of my long spurs under
her girth, and she could not unseat me. She seemed to recognize the
fact after one or two plunges, when to my great surprise, she suddenly
sank to the ground and quietly rolled over me. The action disengaged my
spurs, but righting herself without getting up, she turned her
beautiful head and absolutely _looked_ at me!--still in the saddle. I
felt myself blushing! But the voice of Enriquez was at my side.

"Errise, my friend; you have conquer! It is _she_ who has arrive at the
ground! _You_ are all right. It is done; believe me, it is feenish! No
more shall she make thees think. From thees instant you shall ride her
as the cow--as the rail of thees fence--and remain tranquil. For she is
a-broke! Ta-ta! Regain your hats, gentlemen! Pass in your checks! It is
ovar! How are you now?" He lit a fresh cigarette, put his hands in his
pockets, and smiled at me blandly.

For all that, I ventured to point out that the habit of alighting in
the fork of a tree, or the disengaging of one's self from the saddle on
the ground, was attended with inconvenience, and even ostentatious
display. But Enriquez swept the objections away with a single gesture.
"It is the _preencipal_--the bottom _fact_--at which you arrive. The
next come of himself! Many horse have achieve to mount the rider by the
knees, and relinquish after thees same fashion. My grandfather had a
barb of thees kind--but she has gone dead, and so have my grandfather.
Which is sad and strange! Otherwise I shall make of them both an
instant example!"

I ought to have said that although these performances were never
actually witnessed by Enriquez's sister--for reasons which he and I
thought sufficient--the dear girl displayed the greatest interest in
them and, perhaps aided by our mutually complimentary accounts of each
other, looked upon us both as invincible heroes. It is possible also
that she over-estimated our success, for she suddenly demanded that I
should _ride_ Chu Chu to her house, that she might see her. It was
not far; by going through a back lane I could avoid the trees which
exercised such a fatal fascination for Chu Chu. There was a pleading,
childlike entreaty in Consuelo's voice that I could not resist, with a
slight flash from her lustrous dark eyes that I did not care to
encourage. So I resolved to try it at all hazards.

My equipment for the performance was modeled after Enriquez's previous
costume, with the addition of a few fripperies of silver and stamped
leather out of compliment to Consuelo, and even with a faint hope that
it might appease Chu Chu. _She_ certainly looked beautiful in her
glittering accoutrements, set off by her jet-black shining coat. With
an air of demure abstraction she permitted me to mount her, and even
for a hundred yards or so indulged in a mincing maidenly amble that was
not without a touch of coquetry. Encouraged by this, I addressed a few
terms of endearment to her, and in the exuberance of my youthful
enthusiasm I even confided to her my love for Consuelo and begged her
to be "good" and not disgrace herself and me before my Dulcinea.[154-1]
In my foolish trustfulness I was rash enough to add a caress and to pat
her soft neck. She stopped instantly with a hysteric shudder. I knew
what was passing through her mind: she had suddenly become aware of my
baleful existence.

The saddle and bridle Chu Chu was becoming accustomed to, but who was
this living, breathing object that had actually touched her? Presently
her oblique vision was attracted by the fluttering movement of a fallen
oak leaf in the road before her. She had probably seen many oak leaves
many times before; her ancestors had no doubt been familiar with them
on the trackless hills and in field and paddock, but this did not alter
her profound conviction that I and the leaf were identical, that our
baleful touch was something indissolubly connected. She reared before
that innocent leaf, she revolved round it, and then fled from it at the
top of her speed.

The lane passed before the rear wall of Saltello's garden.
Unfortunately, at the angle of the fence stood a beautiful
Madrono-tree, brilliant with its scarlet berries, and endeared to me as
Consuelo's favorite haunt, under whose protecting shade I had more than
once avowed my youthful passion. By the irony of fate Chu Chu caught
sight of it, and with a succession of spirited bounds instantly made
for it. In another moment I was beneath it, and Chu Chu shot like a
rocket into the air. I had barely time to withdraw my feet from the
stirrups, to throw up one arm to protect my glazed sombrero and grasp
an over-hanging branch with the other, before Chu Chu darted off. But
to my consternation, as I gained a secure perch on the tree and looked
about me, I saw her--instead of running away--quietly trot through the
open gate into Saltello's garden.

Need I say that it was to the beneficent Enriquez that I again owed my
salvation? Scarcely a moment elapsed before his bland voice rose in a
concentrated whisper from the corner of the garden below me. He had
divined the dreadful truth!

"For the love of God, collect to yourself many kinds of thees berry!
All you can! Your full arms round! Rest tranquil. Leave to your ole
oncle to make for you a delicate exposure. At the instant!"

He was gone again. I gathered, wonderingly, a few of the larger
clusters of parti-colored fruit and patiently waited. Presently he
reappeared, and with him the lovely Consuelo--her dear eyes filled with
an adorable anxiety.

"Yes," continued Enriquez to his sister, with a confidential lowering
of tone but great distinctness of utterance, "it is ever so with the
American! He will ever make _first_ the salutation of the flower or the
fruit, picked to himself by his own hand, to the lady where he call. It
is the custom of the American hidalgo![156-1] My God--what will you?
_I_ make it not--it is so! Without doubt he is in this instant doing
thees thing. That is why we have let go his horse to precede him here;
it is always the etiquette to offer these things on the feet. Ah!
Behold! it is he!--Don Francisco! Even now he will descend from thees
tree! Ah! You make the blush, little sister (archly)! I will retire! I
am discreet; two is not company for the one! I make tracks! I am gone!"

How far Consuelo entirely believed and trusted her ingenious brother I
do not know, nor even then cared to inquire. For there was a pretty
mantling of her olive cheek, as I came forward with my offering, and a
certain significant shyness in her manner that were enough to throw me
into a state of hopeless imbecility. And I was always miserably
conscious that Consuelo possessed an exalted sentimentality, and a
predilection for the highest mediaeval romance, in which I knew I was
lamentably deficient. Even in our most confidential moments I was
always aware that I weakly lagged behind this daughter of a gloomily
distinguished ancestry, in her frequent incursions into a vague but
poetic past. There was something of the dignity of the Spanish
_chatelaine_[157-1] in the sweetly grave little figure that advanced to
accept my specious offering. I think I should have fallen on my knees
to present it, but for the presence of the all seeing Enriquez. But why
did I even at that moment remember that he had early bestowed upon her
the nickname of "Pomposa"? This, as Enriquez himself might have
observed, was "sad and strange."

I managed to stammer out something about the Madrono berries being at
her "disposition" (the tree was in her own garden!), and she took the
branches in her little brown hand with a soft response to my
unutterable glances.

But here Chu Chu, momentarily forgotten, executed a happy diversion. To
our astonishment she gravely walked up to Consuelo and, stretching out
her long slim neck, not only sniffed curiously at the berries, but even
protruded a black underlip towards the young girl herself. In another
instant Consuelo's dignity melted. Throwing her arms around Chu Chu's
neck she embraced and kissed her. Young as I was, I understood the
divine significance of a girl's vicarious effusiveness at such a
moment, and felt delighted. But I was the more astonished that the
usually sensitive horse not only submitted to these caresses, but
actually responded to the extent of affecting to nip my mistress's
little right ear.

This was enough for the impulsive Consuelo. She ran hastily into the
house and in a few moments reappeared in a bewitching riding-shirt. In
vain Enriquez and myself joined in earnest entreaty: the horse was
hardly broken for even a man's riding yet; the saints alone could tell
what the nervous creature might do with a woman's skirt flipping at her
side! We begged for delay, for reflection, for at least time to change
the saddle--but with no avail! Consuelo was determined, indignant,
distressingly reproachful! Ah, well! if Don Pancho (an ingenious
diminutive of my Christian name) valued his horse so highly--if he were
jealous of the evident devotion of the animal to herself, he would--but
here I succumbed! And then I had the felicity of holding that little
foot for one brief moment in the hollow of my hand, of readjusting the
skirt as she threw her knee over the saddle-horn, of clasping her
tightly--only half in fear--as I surrendered the reins to her grasp.
And to tell the truth, as Enriquez and I fell back, although I had
insisted upon still keeping hold of the end of the _riata_, it was a
picture to admire. The _petite_[158-1] figure of the young girl and the
graceful folds of her skirt admirably harmonized with Chu Chu's lithe
contour, and as the mare arched her slim neck and raised her slender
head under the pressure of the reins, it was so like the lifted
velvet-capped toreador[159-1] crest of Consuelo herself, that they
seemed of one race.

"I would not that you should hold the _riata_," said Consuelo
petulantly.

I hesitated--Chu Chu looked certainly very amiable--I let go. She began
to amble towards the gate, not mincingly as before, but with a freer
and fuller stride. In spite of the incongruous saddle, the young girl's
seat was admirable. As they neared the gate, she cast a single
mischievous glance at me, jerked at the rein, and Chu Chu sprang into
the road at a rapid canter. I watched them fearfully and breathlessly,
until at the end of the lane I saw Consuelo rein in slightly, wheel
easily, and come flying back. There was no doubt about it; the horse
was under perfect control. Her second subjugation was complete and
final!

Overjoyed and bewildered, I overwhelmed them with congratulations;
Enriquez alone retaining the usual brotherly attitude of criticism and
a superior toleration of a lover's enthusiasm. I ventured to hint to
Consuelo (in what I believed was a safe whisper) that Chu Chu only
showed my own feelings towards her. "Without doubt," responded Enriquez
gravely. "She have of herself assist you to climb to the tree to pull
to yourself the berry for my sister." But I felt Consuelo's little hand
return my pressure, and I forgave and even pitied him.

From that day forward, Chu Chu and Consuelo were not only firm friends
but daily companions. In my devotion I would have presented the horse
to the young girl, but with flattering delicacy she preferred to call
it mine. "I shall erride it for you, Pancho," she said; "I shall feel,"
she continued with exalted although somewhat vague poetry, "That it is
of you! You lofe the beast--it is therefore of a necessity _you_, my
Pancho! It is _your_ soul I shall erride like the wings of the
wind--your lofe in this beast shall be my only cavalier for ever." I
would have preferred something whose vicarious qualities were less
uncertain than I still felt Chu Chu's to be, but I kissed the girl's
hand submissively.

It was only when I attempted to accompany her in the flesh, on another
horse, that I felt the full truth of my instinctive fears. Chu Chu
would not permit any one to approach her mistress's side. My mounted
presence revived in her all her old blind astonishment and disbelief in
my existence; she would start suddenly, face about, and back away from
me in utter amazement as if I had been only recently created, or with
an affected modesty as if I had been just guilty of some grave
indecorum towards her sex which she really could not stand. The
frequency of these exhibitions in the public highway were not only
distressing to me as a simple escort, but as it had the effect on the
casual spectators of making Consuelo seem to participate in Chu Chu's
objections, I felt that, as a lover, it could not be borne. An attempt
to coerce Chu Chu ended in her running away. And my frantic pursuit of
her was open to equal misconstruction. "Go it, Miss, the little dude is
gainin' on you!" shouted by a drunken teamster to the frightened
Consuelo, once checked me in mid-career. Even the dear girl herself saw
the uselessness of my real presence, and after a while was content to
ride with "my soul."

Notwithstanding this, I am not ashamed to say that it was my custom,
whenever she rode out, to keep a slinking and distant surveillance of
Chu Chu on another horse, until she had fairly settled down to her
pace. A little nod of Consuelo's round black-and-red toreador hat or a
kiss tossed from her riding-whip was reward enough!

I remember a pleasant afternoon when I was thus awaiting her in the
village. The eternal smile of the Californian summer had begun to waver
and grow less fixed; dust lay thick on leaf and blade; the dry hills
were clothed in russet leather; the trade winds were shifting to the
south with an ominous warm humidity; a few days longer and the rains
would be here. It so chanced that this afternoon my seclusion on the
roadside was accidentally invaded by a village belle--a Western young
lady somewhat older than myself, and of flirtatious reputation. As she
persistently and--as I now have reason to believe--mischievously
lingered, I had only a passing glimpse of Consuelo riding past at an
unaccustomed speed which surprised me at the moment. But as I reasoned
later that she was only trying to avoid a merely formal meeting, I
thought no more about it.

It was not until I called at the house to fetch Chu Chu at the usual
hour, and found that Consuelo had not yet returned, that a recollection
of Chu Chu's furious pace again troubled me. An hour passed--it was
getting towards sunset, but there were no signs of Chu Chu nor her
mistress. I became seriously alarmed. I did not care to reveal my fears
to the family, for I felt myself responsible for Chu Chu. At last I
desperately saddled my horse and galloped off in the direction she had
taken. It was the road to Rosario and the _hacienda_[162-1] of one of
her relations, where she sometimes halted.

The road was a very unfrequented one, twisting like a mountain
river--indeed, it was the bed of an old watercourse--between brown
hills of wild oats, and debouching at last into a broad blue lake-like
expanse of alfalfa[162-2] meadows. In vain I strained my eyes over the
monotonous level; nothing appeared to rise above or move across it. In
the faint hope that she might have lingered at the _hacienda_, I was
spurring on again when I heard a slight splashing on my left. I looked
around. A broad patch of fresher-colored herbage and a cluster of
dwarfed alders indicated a hidden spring. I cautiously approached its
quaggy edges, when I was shocked by what appeared to be a sudden
vision! Mid-leg deep in the center of a greenish pool stood Chu Chu!
But without a strap or buckle of harness upon her--as naked as when she
was foaled!

For a moment I could only stare at her in bewildered terror. Far from
recognizing me, she seemed to be absorbed in a nymph-like contemplation
of her own graces in the pool. Then I called "Consuelo!" and galloped
frantically around the spring. But there was no response, nor was there
anything to be seen but the all-unconscious Chu Chu. The pool, thank
Heaven! was not deep enough to have drowned any one; there were no
signs of a struggle on its quaggy edges. The horse might have come from
a distance! I galloped on, still calling. A few hundred yards further I
detected the vivid glow of Chu Chu's scarlet saddle-blanket in the
brush near the trail. My heart leaped--I was on the track. I called
again; this time a faint reply, in accents I knew too well, came from
the field beside me!

Consuelo was there! reclining beside a manzanita bush which screened
her from the road, in what struck me, even at that supreme moment, as a
judicious and picturesquely selected couch of scented Indian grass and
dry tussocks. The velvet hat with its balls of scarlet plush was laid
carefully aside; her lovely blue-black hair retained its tight coils
undisheveled, her eyes were luminous and tender. Shocked as I was at
her apparent helplessness, I remember being impressed with the fact
that it gave so little indication of violent usage or disaster.

I threw myself frantically on the ground beside her.

"You are hurt, Consita! For Heaven's sake, what has happened?"

She pushed my hat back with her little hand, and tumbled my hair
gently.

"Nothing. _You_ are here, Pancho--eet is enofe! What shall come after
thees--when I am perhaps gone among the grave--make nothing! _You_ are
here--I am happy. For a little, perhaps--not mooch."

"But," I went on desperately, "was it an accident? Were you thrown? Was
it Chu Chu?"--for somehow, in spite of her languid posture and voice, I
could not, even in my fears, believe her seriously hurt.

"Beat not the poor beast, Pancho. It is not from _her_ comes thees
thing. She have make nothing--believe me! I have come upon your
assignation with Miss Essmith! I make but to pass you--to fly--to never
come back! I have say to Chu Chu, 'Fly!' We fly many miles. Sometimes
together, sometimes not so mooch! Sometimes in the saddle, sometimes on
the neck! Many things remain in the road; at the end, I myself remain!
I have say, 'Courage, Pancho will come!' Then I say, 'No, he is talk
with Miss Essmith!' I remember not more. I have creep here on the
hands. Eet is feenish!"

I looked at her distractedly. She smiled tenderly and slightly smoothed
down and rearranged a fold of her dress to cover her delicate little
boot.

"But," I protested, "you are not much hurt, dearest. You have broken no
bones. Perhaps," I added, looking at the boot, "only a slight sprain.
Let me carry you to my horse; I will walk beside you, home. Do, dearest
Consita!"

She turned her lovely eyes towards me sadly. "You comprehend not, my
poor Pancho! It is not of the foot, the ankle, the arm, or the head
that I can say, 'She is broke.' I would it were even so. But"--she
lifted her sweet lashes slowly--"I have derrange my inside. It is an
affair of my family. My grandfather have once toomble over the bull at
a _rodeo_.[165-1] He speak no more; he is dead. For why? He has
derrange his inside. Believe me, it is of the family. You comprehend?
The Saltellos are not as the other peoples for this. When I am gone,
you will bring to me the berry to grow upon my tomb, Pancho; the berry
you have picked for me. The little flower will come too, the little
star will arrive, but Consuelo, who lofe you, she will come not more!

"When you are happy and talk in the road to the Essmith, you will not
think of me. You will not see my eyes, Pancho; thees little grass"--she
ran her plump little fingers through a tussock--"will hide them; and
the small animals in the black coats that lif here will have much
sorrow--but you will not. It ees better so! My father will not that I,
a Catholique, should marry into a camp-meeting and lif in a tent." (It
was one of Consuelo's bewildering beliefs that there was only one form
of dissent--Methodism!) "He will not that I should marry a man who
possess not the many horses, ox, and cow, like him. But _I_ care not.
_You_ are my only religion, Pancho! I have enofe of the horse, and ox,
and cow when _you_ are with me! Kiss me, Pancho. Perhaps it is for the
last time--the feenish! Who knows?"

There were tears in her lovely eyes; I felt that my own were growing
dim; the sun was sinking over the dreary plain to the slow rising of
the wind; and infinite loneliness had fallen upon us, and yet I was
miserably conscious of some dreadful unreality in it all. A desire to
laugh, which I felt must be hysterical, was creeping over me; I dared
not speak. But her dear head was on my shoulder, and the situation was
not unpleasant.

Nevertheless, something must be done! This was the more difficult as it
was by no means clear what had already been done. Even while I
supported her drooping figure, I was straining my eyes across her
shoulder for succor of some kind. Suddenly the figure of a rapid rider
appeared upon the road. It seemed familiar. I looked again--it was the
blessed Enriquez! A sense of deep relief came over me. I loved
Consuelo; but never before had lover ever hailed the irruption of one
of his beloved's family with such complacency.

"You are safe, dearest; it is Enriquez!"

I thought she received the information coldly. Suddenly she turned upon
me her eyes, now bright and glittering. "Swear to me at the instant,
Pancho, that you will not again look upon Miss Essmith, even for once."

I was simple and literal. Miss Smith was my nearest neighbor, and
unless I was stricken with blindness, compliance was impossible. I
hesitated--but swore.

"Enofe--you have hesitate--I will no more."

She rose to her feet with grave deliberation. For an instant, with the
recollection of the delicate internal organization of the Saltellos on
my mind, I was in agony lest she should totter and fall, even then,
yielding up her gentle spirit on the spot. But when I looked again, she
had a hairpin between her white teeth and was carefully adjusting her
toreador hat. And beside us was Enriquez--cheerful, alert, voluble, and
undaunted.

"Eureka! I have found! We are all here! Eet is a leetle public--eh! A
leetle too much of a front seat for a _tete-a-tete_,[167-1] my yonge
friends," he said, glancing at the remains of Consuelo's bower, "but
for the accounting of taste there is none. What will you? The meat of
the one man shall envenom the meat of the other. But" (in a whisper to
me) "as to thees horse--thees Chu Chu, which I have just pass--why is
she undress? Surely you would no make an exposition of her to the
traveler to suspect! And if not, why so?"

I tried to explain, looking at Consuelo, that Chu Chu had run away,
that Consuelo had met with a terrible accident, had been thrown, and I
feared had suffered serious internal injury. But to my embarrassment
Consuelo maintained a half scornful silence, and an inconsistent
freshness of healthful indifference, as Enriquez approached her with an
engaging smile. "Ah, yes, she have the headache, and the molligrubs.
She will sit on the damp stone when the gentle dew is falling. I
comprehend. Meet me in the lane when the clock strike nine! But," in a
lower voice, "of thees undress horse I comprehend nothing! Look you--it
is sad and strange."

He went off to fetch Chu Chu, leaving me and Consuelo alone. I do not
think I ever felt so utterly abject and bewildered before in my life.
Without knowing why, I was miserably conscious of having in some way
offended the girl for whom I believed I would have given my life, and I
had made her and myself ridiculous in the eyes of her brother. I had
again failed in my slower Western nature to understand her high
romantic Spanish soul! Meantime she was smoothing out her riding habit,
and looking as fresh and pretty as when she first left her house.

"Consita," I said hesitatingly, "you are not angry with me?"

"Angry?" she repeated haughtily, without looking at me. "Oh, no! Of a
possibility eet is Mees Essmith who is angry that I have interroopt her
tete-a-tete with you, and have send here my brother to make the same
with me."

"But," I said eagerly, "Miss Smith does not even know Enriquez!"

Consuelo turned on me a glance of unutterable significance. "Ah!" she
said darkly, "you _tink_!"

Indeed I _knew_. But here I believed I understood Consuelo and was
relieved. I even ventured to say gently, "And you are better?"

She drew herself up to her full height, which was not much. "Of my
health, what is it? A nothing. Yes! Of my soul let us not speak."

Nevertheless, when Enriquez appeared with Chu Chu she ran towards her
with outstretched arms. Chu Chu protruded about six inches of upper lip
in response--apparently under the impression, which I could quite
understand, that her mistress was edible. And, I may have been
mistaken, but their beautiful eyes met in an absolute and distinct
glance of intelligence!

During the home journey Consuelo recovered her spirits and parted from
me with a magnanimous and forgiving pressure of the hand. I do not know
what explanation of Chu Chu's original escapade was given to Enriquez
and the rest of the family; the inscrutable forgiveness extended to me
by Consuelo precluded any further inquiry on my part. I was willing to
leave it a secret between her and Chu Chu. But strange to say, it
seemed to complete our own understanding, and precipitated, not only
our love-making, but the final catastrophe which culminated that
romance. For we had resolved to elope. I do not know that this heroic
remedy was absolutely necessary from the attitude of either Consuelo's
family or my own; I am inclined to think we preferred it because it
involved no previous explanation or advice.

Need I say that our confidant and firm ally was Consuelo's brother--the
alert, the linguistic, the ever-happy, ever-ready Enriquez? It was
understood that his presence would not only give a certain mature
respectability to our performance--but I do not think we would have
contemplated this step without it. During one of our riding excursions
we were to secure the services of a Methodist minister in the adjoining
county, and later that of the Mission _padre_[169-1]--when the secret
was out. "I will gif her away," said Enriquez confidently, "it will on
the instant propitiate the old fellow who shall perform the affair and
withhold his jaw. A little chin-music from your oncle 'Arry shall
finish it! Remain tranquil and forget not a ring! One does not always,
in the agony and dissatisfaction of the moment, a ring remember. I
shall bring two in the pocket of my dress."

If I did not entirely participate in this roseate view, it may have
been because Enriquez, although a few years my senior, was much
younger-looking, and with his demure deviltry of eye and his upper lip
close shaven for this occasion, he suggested a depraved acolyte rather
than a responsible member of a family. Consuelo had also confided to me
that her father--possibly owing to some rumors of our previous
escapade--had forbidden any further excursions with me alone. The
innocent man did not know that Chu Chu had forbidden it also, and that
even on this momentous occasion both Enriquez and myself were obliged
to ride in opposite fields like out-flankers. But we nevertheless felt
the full guilt of disobedience added to our desperate enterprise.
Meanwhile, although pressed for time and subject to discovery at any
moment, I managed at certain points of the road to dismount and walk
beside Chu Chu (who did not seem to recognize me on foot), holding
Consuelo's hand in my own, with the discreet Enriquez leading my horse
in the distant field. I retain a very vivid picture of that walk--the
ascent of a gentle slope towards a prospect as yet unknown but full of
glorious possibilities; the tender dropping light of an autumn sky,
slightly filmed with the promise of the future rains, like foreshadowed
tears, and the half-frightened, half-serious talk into which Consuelo
and I had insensibly fallen.

And then, I don't know how it happened, but as we reached the summit
Chu Chu suddenly reared, wheeled, and the next moment was flying back
along the road we had just traveled, at the top of her speed! It might
have been that, after her abstracted fashion, she only at that moment
detected my presence; but so sudden and complete was her evolution that
before I could regain my horse from the astonished Enriquez she was
already a quarter of a mile on the homeward stretch, with the frantic
Consuelo pulling hopelessly at the bridle.

We started in pursuit. But a horrible despair seized us. To attempt to
overtake her, even to follow at the same rate of speed would only
excite Chu Chu and endanger Consuelo's life. There was absolutely no
help for it, nothing could be done; the mare had taken her determined,
long, continuous stride, the road was a straight, steady descent all
the way back to the village, Chu Chu had the bit between her teeth, and
there was no prospect of swerving her. We could only follow hopelessly,
idiotically, furiously, until Chu Chu dashed triumphantly into the
Saltellos' courtyard, carrying the half-fainting Consuelo back to the
arms of her assembled and astonished family.

It was our last ride together. It was the last I ever saw of Consuelo
before her transfer to the safe seclusion of a convent in Southern
California. It was the last I ever saw of Chu Chu, who in the confusion
of that _rencontre_[172-1] was overlooked in her half-loosed harness
and allowed to escape through the back gate to the fields. Months
afterwards it was said that she had been identified among a band of
wild horses in the Coast Range, as a strange and beautiful creature who
had escaped the brand of the _rodeo_ and had become a myth. There was
another legend that she had been seen, sleek, fat, and gorgeously
caparisoned, issuing from the gateway of the Rosario _patio_,[172-2]
before a lumbering Spanish _cabriole_[172-3] in which a short, stout
matron was seated--but I will have none of it. For there are days when
she still lives, and I can see her plainly still climbing the gentle
slope towards the summit, with Consuelo on her back and myself at her
side, pressing eagerly forward towards the illimitable prospect that
opens in the distance.